## ##subsec Modifying Temporal Data

This section and its subsections describe modifications in application
time, both for
- _snapshot entity sets_ with hidden
  application time, where time slices exist in the data persistency but
  are not directly visible in the entity set, each OData entity
  corresponds to a temporal object and only represents data at one point
  in time, and for
- _timeline entity sets_ with visible
  application time, where each OData entity corresponds to an
  application-time slice and all application-time slices of a temporal
  object are part of the entity set.

Modification operations fall into two categories:
- Direct modification of time slices, and
- Changes to a temporal object over a
  period of application time that can affect multiple time slices without
  explicitly addressing each single affected time slice.

### ##subsubsec Direct Modification of Time Slices

The temporal query options [`$at`](#QueryOptionat),
[`$from` and `$to`/`$toInclusive`](#QueryOptionsfromtoandtoInclusive)
can be used with data modification operations, in which case they do not
alter the modification semantics of the request, they only affect the
response of the "implicit `GET`" after the data modification.

Modification of time slices SHOULD be done with the temporal actions
defined in the next section and its subsections.

This specification does not define the behavior of standard insert,
update, upsert, or delete requests on temporal entity sets, and
potential side-effects of direct modification requests to period
boundaries and adjacent time slices are beyond the scope of this
specification as the underlying business logic will vary from service to
service.

### ##subsubsec Operations on Temporal Objects

Changes to a temporal object over a period of application time can
affect multiple time slices. For timeline entity sets this can in
principle be achieved by constructing batch requests with multiple
operations on individual time slices. This puts burden on the client,
and it also makes it harder for services to check whether the request
represents a consistent change of the temporal data.

Both can be avoided by providing convenience operations expressing the
intent of the modification and leaving the actual time slice
manipulation to the service. These operations can then also be used with
snapshot entity sets that do not allow direct manipulation of time
slices.

These convenience operations are modeled as bound actions and defined in
the vocabulary for temporal data [OData-VocTemporal](#ODataVocTemporal).
Implementations SHOULD consider the preferences `return=representation`
and `return=minimal` as specified inv[OData-Protocol](#ODataProtocol).
The convenience operations are atomic (all or nothing): they either
succeed and produce the result described below, or they fail and do not
change the temporal objects.

All actions define a collection of entities as their binding parameter.
This collection can be
- A snapshot entity set
- A timeline entity set containing time slices for a single temporal object, or
- A timeline entity set containing time slices for multiple temporal objects.

Services MAY support any or all of these convenience actions. Services
SHOULD advertise the supported actions with property `SupportedActions`
of term [`ApplicationTimeSupport`](#VocabularyforTemporalData).

Services may define specialized convenience operations for use cases not
covered by this specification.

All actions return a collection of triples that consist of period start
and end and a time slice, which has the same entity set as the binding
parameter and advertises this through `odata.context` control
information.

#### ##subsubsubsec Update during a Period

The `Update` action updates existing time slices with values from delta
time slices whose temporal object keys match and whose periods overlap.

Its non-binding parameter `deltaTimeslices` is a collection of a
structure containing the period boundaries, the properties to update,
and optionally temporal object key values. The period boundaries are
interpreted according to the [`UnitOfTime`](#VocabularyforTemporalData)
of the collection. In particular, `ClosedClosedPeriods` governs whether
the period end of type `Edm.Date` is the last day in the period or the
first day after the period. The upper period boundary for items in
`deltaTimeslices` need not be supplied; if it has no declared default
value, it defaults to `max`.

This works identical to the SQL statement UPDATE FOR PORTION OF:

1. The "delta time slices" in `deltaTimeslices` are processed in the
   order of the collection.
2. For each delta time slice all time slices from the bound collection
   are selected whose temporal object key values are identical to the
   values of corresponding properties present in the delta time slice, and
   whose application-time period overlaps with the period of the delta time
   slice.
3. Selected time slices whose period is not fully included in the
   period of the delta time slice are split into two or three consecutive
   time slices, one with fully included period, and one or two with a
   non-overlapping period immediately before or after the delta time
   slice's period.
4. Then all fully included time slices (including ones created in the
   previous step) are updated following the rules for updating entities
   specified in [OData-Protocol](#ODataProtocol).
5. Gaps between selected time slices in the period to update are not affected.

On success it returns the created or updated time slices.

::: example
Example ##ex: Change a department's budget during a period of application
time with [`api-2`](#api2) (visible timeline)
```json
POST \~/Departments('D08')/history/Temporal.Update
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "deltaTimeslices": [
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "From": "2012-04-01",
        "To": "2014-07-01",
        "Budget": 1320
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
Given the [example department data](#ExampleData)
the operation will split the time slice starting at 2012-01-01 creating
a new time slice starting at 2012-04-01 which is then updated with the
desired budget. It will then update the time slice starting at
2012-06-01 with the desired budget, and finally it will split the time
slice starting at 2014-01-01 creating a new time slice starting at
2014-07-01, then update the original with the desired budget, leaving
the new time slice starting at 2014-07-01 untouched:

:::: {.obj-1 .temp-2}
**Departments (after)**

ID     | From         | To           | Name                | Budget
-------|--------------|--------------|---------------------|-------
D08    | 2010-01-01   | 2012-01-01   | Support             | 1000
D08    | 2012-01-01   | *2012-04-01* | Support             | 1250
*D08*  | *2012-04-01* | *2012-06-01* | *Support*           | *1320*
D08    | 2012-06-01   | 2014-01-01   | 1st Level Support   | *1320*
D08    | 2014-01-01   | *2014-07-01* | 1st Level Support   | *1320*
*D08*  | *2014-07-01* | *max*        | *1st Level Support* | *1400*
D15    | 2010-01-01   | 2011-01-01   | Services            | 1100
D15    | 2011-01-01   | max          | Services            | 1170
::::

It returns the resulting created or updated time slices
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "../../$metadata#Collection(Temporal.TimesliceWithPeriod)",
  "value": [
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Departments('D08')/history/$entity",
        "From": "2012-01-01",
        "To": "2012-04-01",
        "Name": "Support",
        "Budget": 1250
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Departments('D08')/history/$entity",
        "From": "2012-04-01",
        "To": "2012-06-01",
        "Name": "Support",
        "Budget": 1320
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Departments('D08')/history/$entity",
        "From": "2012-06-01",
        "To": "2014-01-01",
        "Name": "1st Level Support",
        "Budget": 1320
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Departments('D08')/history/$entity",
        "From": "2014-01-01",
        "To": "2014-07-01",
        "Name": "1st Level Support",
        "Budget": 1320
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Departments('D08')/history/$entity",
        "From": "2014-07-01",
        "To": "9999-12-31",
        "Name": "1st Level Support",
        "Budget": 1400
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
The service could have joined the third and fourth time slice because
they do not significantly differ.
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: Change an employee's job title during a period of
application time with [`api-1`](#api1) (snapshot). Note that the period boundaries are not visible in
[`api-1`](#api1) and are provided as `PeriodStart` and `PeriodEnd` next to the
`Timeslice` data. The `PeriodEnd` is omitted, meaning the end of application time.
```json
POST \~/Employees/Temporal.Update
Content-Type: application/json
 
{
  "deltaTimeslices": [
    {
      "PeriodStart": "2021-10-01",
      "Timeslice": {
        "ID": "E401",
        "Jobtitle": "Ultimate Expert"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
Given the [example employee data](#ExampleData)
the operation will split the time slice for employee `E401` starting at
2012-03-01 creating a new time slice starting at 2021-10-01 which is
then updated with the desired job title.

:::: {.obj-1 .temp-2 .nav-6}
**Employees (after)**

ID     | From         | To           | Name     | Jobtitle          | Department.ID
-------|--------------|--------------|----------|-------------------|--------------
E314   | 2011-01-01   | 2013-10-01   | McDevitt | Junior            | D08
E314   | 2013-10-01   | 2014-01-01   | McDevitt | Senior            | D08
E314   | 2014-01-01   | max          | McDevitt | Senior            | D15
E401   | 2009-11-01   | 2012-03-01   | Norman   | Expert            | D15
E401   | 2012-03-01   | *2021-10-01* | Gibson   | Expert            | D15
*E401* | *2021-10-01* | *max*        | *Gibson* | *Ultimate Expert* | *D15*
::::

It returns the resulting created or updated time slices
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "../$metadata#Collection(Temporal.TimesliceWithPeriod)",
  "value": [
    {
      "PeriodStart": "2012-03-01",
      "PeriodEnd": "2021-10-01",
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Employees/$entity",
        "ID": "E401",
        "Name": "Gibson",
        "Jobtitle": "Expert"
      }
    },
    {
      "PeriodStart": "2021-10-01",
      "PeriodEnd": "9999-12-31",
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#Employees/$entity",
        "ID": "E401",
        "Name": "Gibson",
        "Jobtitle": "Ultimate Expert"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Upsert during a Period

The `Upsert` action upserts existing time slices with values from delta
time slices whose temporal object keys match and whose periods overlap,
and in addition creates new time slices to close gaps in the matching
time period.

It has the same signature as [`Update`](#UpdateduringaPeriod),
and steps 1 to 4 work identical to [`Update`](#UpdateduringaPeriod).
Step 5 is

5. Gaps between selected time slices in the period to update are closed
   by creating new adjacent time slices: for each gap that has an
   immediately preceding time slice, a new time slice is created by

   1. copying the property values of the preceding time slice
      (except for computed properties),
   2. setting the period boundaries to close the gap, and then
   3. updating the new time slice following the rules for updating
      entities specified in [OData-Protocol](#ODataProtocol).

   If no preceding time slice exists, the time slice is created following
   the rules for creating entities specified in [OData-Protocol](#ODataProtocol).

On success it returns the created or updated time slices.

::: example
Example ##ex: Upsert two [cost centers](#CostCenters)
during a period of application time using the model from Example 8
```json
POST \~/CostCenters/Temporal.Upsert
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "deltaTimeslices": [
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C1",
        "ValidTo": "2001-03-31",
        "ValidFrom": "1984-04-01",
        "ProfitCenterID": "P2"
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C2",
        "ValidFrom": "2012-04-01",
        "DepartmentID": "D04"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
Given this example data (primary key in olive)

:::: {.key-1 .obj-2 .obj-3 .temp-4}
**CostCenters (before)**

tsid | AreaID | CostCenterID | ValidTo    | ValidFrom  | ProfitCenterID | DepartmentID
-----|--------|--------------|------------|------------|----------------|-------------
n    | 51     | C1           | max        | 1955-04-01 | P1             | D02
::::

the operation will split the time slice `n` for
cost center `C1` starting at 1955-04-01 creating two new time slices,
the one starting at 1984-04-01 is then updated with the desired profit
center. It will also insert a new time slice for the not yet existing
cost center `C2` with the desired values.

Note that this example uses closed-closed periods, so each time slice
ends the day before the start of the next adjacent time slice.

:::: {.key-1 .obj-2 .obj-3 .temp-4}
**CostCenters (after)**

tsid | AreaID | CostCenterID | ValidTo      | ValidFrom    | ProfitCenterID | DepartmentID
-----|--------|--------------|--------------|--------------|----------------|-------------
n    | 51     | C1           | *1984-03-31* | 1955-04-01   | P1             | D02
*o*  | *51*   | *C1*         | *2001-03-31* | *1984-04-01* | *P2*           | *D02*
*p*  | *51*   | *C1*         | *max*        | *2001-04-01* | *P1*           | *D02*
*q*  | *51*   | *C2*         | *max*        | *2012-04-01* |                | *D04*
::::

It returns the resulting created or updated time slices per affected temporal object
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "../$metadata#Collection(Temporal.TimesliceWithPeriod)",
  "value": [
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#CostCenters/$entity",
        "tsid": "n",
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C1",
        "ValidTo": "1984-03-31",
        "ValidFrom": "1955-04-01",
        "ProfitCenterID": "P1",
        "DepartmentID": "D02"
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#CostCenters/$entity",
        "tsid": "o",
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C1",
        "ValidTo": "2001-03-31",
        "ValidFrom": "1984-04-01",
        "ProfitCenterID": "P2",
        "DepartmentID": "D02"
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#CostCenters/$entity",
        "tsid": "p",
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C1",
        "ValidTo": "9999-12-31",
        "ValidFrom": "2001-04-01",
        "ProfitCenterID": "P1",
        "DepartmentID": "D02"
      }
    },
    {
      "Timeslice": {
        "@odata.context": "#CostCenters/$entity",
        "tsid": "q",
        "AreaID": "51",
        "CostCenterID": "C2",
        "ValidTo": "9999-12-31",
        "ValidFrom": "2012-04-01",
        "ProfitCenterID": null,
        "DepartmentID": "D04"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Delete during a Period

The `Delete` action deletes (sub-periods of) time slices.

Its non-binding parameter `deltaTimeslices` is a collection of a
structure containing the period boundaries and optionally temporal
object key values. The period boundaries are interpreted according to
the [`UnitOfTime`](#VocabularyforTemporalData)
of the collection. In particular, `ClosedClosedPeriods` governs whether
the period end of type `Edm.Date` is the last day in the period or the
first day after the period.

This works identical to the SQL statement DELETE FOR PORTION OF:
 
1. The "delta time slices" in `deltaTimeslices` are processed in the
   order of the collection.
2. For each delta time slice all time slices from the bound collection
   are selected whose temporal object key values are identical to the
   values of corresponding properties present in the delta time slice, and
   whose application-time period overlaps with the period of the delta time
   slice.
3. Selected time slices whose period is not fully included in the
   period of the delta time slice are split into two consecutive time
   slices, one with non-overlapping, and one with fully included period.
4. Then all fully included time slices (including ones created in the
   previous step) are deleted following the rules for deleting entities
   specified in [OData-Protocol](#ODataProtocol).

On success it returns the deleted time slices.

### ##subsubsec ETags

Timeline entity sets need no special consideration as each time slice is
an OData entity.

This specification does not define the behavior of standard insert,
update, upsert, or delete requests for snapshot entity sets and
consequently defines no rules for ETags of entities in snapshot entity
sets. Services supporting these requests are advised to associate ETags
with time slices rather than with temporal objects.

### ##subsubsec Read, Edit, Navigation, and Association URLs

Timeline entity sets need no special consideration as each time slice is
an OData entity.

For snapshot entity sets read, edit, navigation, and association URLs
are not specific to time slices, they are specific to the
time-independent OData entity.
