## ##subsec Operations

Custom operations ([Actions](#Actions) and [Functions](#Functions))
allow encapsulating logic for modifying or requesting data that goes
beyond simple CRUD described in the preceding sections of this chapter.
See `Action`, `ActionImport`, `Function`, and `FunctionImport` in
[OData-CSDLJSON](#ODataCSDL) or [OData-CSDLXML](#ODataCSDLXML).

### ##subsubsec Binding an Operation to a Resource

[Actions](#Actions) and [Functions](#Functions) MAY be bound to any type
or collection, similar to defining a method in a class in
object-oriented programming. The first parameter of a bound operation is
the *binding parameter*.

The namespace- or alias-qualified name of a bound operation may be
appended to any URL that identifies a resource whose type matches, or is
derived from, the type of the binding parameter. The resource identified
by that URL is used as the *binding parameter value*. Only aliases
defined in the metadata document of the service can be used in URLs.

::: example
Example ##ex: the function `MostRecentOrder` can be bound to any URL that
identifies a `SampleModel.Customer`
```xml
<Function Name="MostRecentOrder" IsBound="true">
  <Parameter Name="customer" Type="SampleModel.Customer" />
  <ReturnType Type="SampleModel.Order" />
</Function>
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke the `MostRecentOrder` function with the value of the
binding parameter `customer` being the entity identified by
`http://host/service/Customers(6)`
```
GET http://host/service/Customers(6)/SampleModel.MostRecentOrder()
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: the function `Comparison` can be bound to any URL that
identifies a collection of entities
```xml
<Function Name="Comparison" IsBound="true">
  <Parameter Name="in" Type="Collection(Edm.EntityType)" />
  <ReturnType Type="Diff.Overview" />
</Function>
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke the `Comparison` function on the set of red products
```
GET http://host/service/Products/$filter(Color eq 'Red')/Diff.Comparison()
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Applying an Operation to Members of a Collection

A bound operation with a single-valued binding parameter can be applied
to each member of a collection by appending the path segment `/$each` to
the resource path of the collection, followed by a forward slash and the
namespace- or alias-qualified name of the bound operation. In this case
the type of the collection members MUST match or be derived from the
type of the binding parameter.

The resource path of the collection MAY contain type-cast or filter
segments to subset the collection.

The response is a collection with members that are instances of the
result type of the bound operation. If the bound operation returns a
collection, the response is a collection of collections.

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke the `MostRecentOrder` function on each entity in the
entity set `Customers`
```
GET http://host/service/Customers/$each/SampleModel.MostRecentOrder()
```
:::

The client MAY specify the `continue-on-error` preference, in which case
the service MAY continue processing actions after a failure. In this
case, the service MUST, regardless of the `return` preference, return a
response containing at least the members identified by the request for
which the action failed. Such members MUST be annotated with the term
`Core.DataModificationException` with a `failedOperation` value of
`invoke`.

If the `continue-on-error` preference has not been specified, and the
service is unable to invoke the action against all of the entities
identified by the request, then it MUST return an error response and
MUST NOT apply the action to any of the members of the collection.

### ##subsubsec Advertising Available Operations within a Payload

Services MAY return actions and/or functions bound to a particular
entity or entity collection as part of the representation of the entity
or entity collection within the payload. The representation of an action
or function depends on the [format](#Formats).

::: example
Example ##ex: given a `GET` request to
`http://host/service/Customers('ALFKI')`, the service might respond with
a Customer that includes the `SampleEntities.MostRecentOrder` function
bound to the entity
```json
{
  "@context": …,
  "CustomerID": "ALFKI",
  "CompanyName": "Alfreds Futterkiste",
  "#SampleEntities.MostRecentOrder": {
    "title": "Most Recent Order",
    "target": "Customers('ALFKI')/SampleEntities.MostRecentOrder()"
  },
  …
}
```
:::

An efficient format that assumes client knowledge of metadata may omit
actions and functions from the payload  whose target URL can be computed
via metadata following standard conventions defined in
[#OData-URL#AddressingOperations].

Services can advertise that a function or action is not available for a
particular instance by setting its value to null.

::: example
Example ##ex: the `SampleEntities.MostRecentOrder` function is not
available for customer `ALFKI`
```json
{
  "@context": …,
  "CustomerID": "ALFKI",
  "CompanyName": "Alfreds Futterkiste",
  "#SampleEntities.MostRecentOrder": null,
  …
}
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Functions

Functions are operations exposed by an OData service that MUST return
data and MUST have no observable side effects.

#### ##subsubsubsec Invoking a Function

To invoke a function bound to a resource, the client issues a `GET`
request to a function URL. A function URL may be
[obtained](#AdvertisingAvailableOperationswithinaPayload) from a previously
returned entity representation or constructed by appending the
namespace- or alias-qualified function name to a URL that identifies a
resource whose type is the same as, or derived from, the type of the
binding parameter of the function. The value for the binding parameter
is the value of the resource identified by the URL prior to appending
the function name, and additional parameter values are specified using
[inline parameter syntax](#InlineParameterSyntax).
In parameters containing complex instances or transient entities,
properties with a defined default
value, nullable properties, and collection-valued properties that are omitted
from the request are interpreted as the default value, null, or an empty collection,
respectively.

If the function URL
is [obtained](#AdvertisingAvailableOperationswithinaPayload) from a previously
returned entity representation, [parameter aliases](#ParameterAliases)
that are identical to the parameter name preceded by an at (`@`) sign
MUST be used. Clients MUST check if the obtained URL already contains a
query part and appropriately precede the parameters either with an
ampersand (`&`) or a question mark (`?`).

Services MAY additionally support invoking functions using the
unqualified function name by defining one or more [default
namespaces](#DefaultNamespaces) through the
[Core.DefaultNamespace]{.term} term
defined in [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore).

To request processing of the function only if the binding parameter value,
an entity or collection of entities, is unmodified, the client includes
the [`If-Match`](#HeaderIfMatch) header with the latest known ETag value
for the entity or collection of entities. The ETag value for a
collection as a whole is transported in the `ETag` header of a
collection response.

Functions can be used within [`$filter`](#SystemQueryOptionfilter) or
[`$orderby`](#SystemQueryOptionorderby) system query options. Such
functions can be bound to a resource, as described above, or called
directly by specifying the namespace- (or alias-) qualified function
name. Parameter values for functions within
[`$filter`](#SystemQueryOptionfilter) or
[`$orderby`](#SystemQueryOptionorderby) are specified according to the
[inline parameter syntax](#InlineParameterSyntax).

To invoke a function through a function import the client issues a `GET`
request to a URL identifying the function import and passing parameter
values using [inline parameter syntax](#InlineParameterSyntax). The
canonical URL for a function import is the service root, followed by the
name of the function import. Services MAY support omitting the
parentheses when invoking a function import with no parameters, but for
maximum interoperability MUST also support invoking the function import
with empty parentheses.

If the function is composable, additional path segments may be appended
to the URL that identifies the composable function (or function import)
as appropriate for the type returned by the function (or function
import). The last path segment determines the system query options and
HTTP verbs that can be used with this this URL, e.g. if the last path
segment is a multi-valued navigation property, a `POST` request may be
used to create a new entity in the identified collection.

::: example
Example ##ex: add a new item to the list of items of the shopping cart
returned by the composable `MyShoppingCart` function import
```
POST http://host/service/MyShoppingCart()/Items

…
```
:::

If the function returns a value of type `Edm.Stream` and no additional path
segments follow the function invocation, the response to the `GET` request
follows the rules for [requesting stream properties](#RequestingStreamProperties).

Parameter values passed to functions MUST be specified either as a URL
literal (for primitive values) or as a JSON formatted OData object (for
complex values, or collections of primitive or complex values). Entity
typed values are passed as JSON formatted entities that MAY include a
subset of the properties, or just the entity reference, as appropriate
to the function.

If a collection-valued function has no result for a given parameter
value combination, the response is the format-specific representation of
an empty collection. If a single-valued function with a nullable
return-type has no result, the service returns
[`204 No Content`](#ResponseCode204NoContent).

If a single-valued function with a non-nullable return type has no
result, the service returns `4xx`. For functions that return a single
entity [`404 Not Found`](#ResponseCode404NotFound) is the appropriate
response code.

For a composable function the processing is stopped when the function
result requires a `4xx` response, and continues otherwise.

Function imports preceded by the `$root` literal MAY be used in the
[`$filter`](#SystemQueryOptionfilter) or
[`$orderby`](#SystemQueryOptionorderby) system query options, see
[#OData-URL#SystemQueryOptionfilter] and [#OData-URL#SystemQueryOptionorderby].

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Inline Parameter Syntax

Parameter values are specified inline by appending a comma-separated
list of parameter values, enclosed by parenthesis to the function name.

Each parameter value is represented as a name/value pair in the format
`Name=Value`, where `Name` is the name of the parameter to the function
and `Value` is the parameter value.

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke a `Sales.EmployeesByManager` function which takes a
single `ManagerID` parameter via the function import
`EmployeesByManager`
```
GET http://host/service/EmployeesByManager(ManagerID=3)
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: return all Customers whose `City` property returns
`Western` when passed to the `Sales.SalesRegion` function
```
GET http://host/service/Customers?
      $filter=Sales.SalesRegion(City=$it/City) eq 'Western'
```
:::

A [parameter alias](#ParameterAliases) can be used in place of an inline
parameter value. The value for the alias is specified as a separate
query option using the name of the parameter alias.

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke a `Sales.EmployeesByManager` function via the
function import `EmployeesByManager`, passing 3 for the `ManagerID`
parameter
```
GET http://host/service/EmployeesByManager(ManagerID=@p1)?@p1=3
```
:::

Services MAY in addition allow implicit [parameter
aliases](#ParameterAliases) for function imports and for functions that
are the last path segment of the URL. An implicit parameter alias is the
parameter name, optionally preceded by an at (`@`) sign. When using
implicit parameter aliases, parentheses MUST NOT be appended to the
function (import) name. The value for each parameter MUST be specified
as a separate query option with the name of the parameter alias. If a
parameter name is identical to a system query option name (without the
optional `$` prefix), the parameter name MUST be prefixed with an at
(`@`) sign.

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke a `Sales.EmployeesByManager` function via the
function import `EmployeesByManager`, passing 3 for the `ManagerID`
parameter using the implicit parameter alias
```
GET http://host/service/EmployeesByManager?ManagerID=3
```
:::

Non-binding parameters annotated with the term
[Core.OptionalParameter]{.term} defined
in [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore) MAY be omitted. If it is annotated and
the annotation specifies a `DefaultValue`, the omitted parameter is
interpreted as having that default value. If omitted and the annotation
does not specify a default value, the service is free on how to
interpret the omitted parameter.

#### ##subsubsubsec Function overload resolution

The same function name may be used multiple times within a schema, each
with a different set of parameters. For unbound overloads the
combination of the function name and the unordered set of parameter
names MUST identify a particular function overload. For bound overloads
the combination of the function name, the binding parameter type, and
the unordered set of names of the non-binding parameters MUST identify a
particular function overload.

All unbound overloads MUST have the same return type. Also, all bound
overloads with a given binding parameter type MUST have the same return
type.

If the function is bound and the binding parameter type is part of an
inheritance hierarchy, the function overload is selected based on the
type of the URL segment preceding the function name. A type-cast segment
can be used to select a function defined on a particular type in the
hierarchy, see [#OData-URL#AddressingDerivedTypes].

Non-binding parameters MAY be marked as optional by annotating them with
the term
[Core.OptionalParameter]{.term} defined
in [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore). All parameters marked as optional
MUST come after any parameters not marked as optional.

A function overload is selected if
- The set of specified parameters exactly
matches a function overload, or else
- The set of specified parameters matches
a subset of parameters that includes all non-optional parameters of
exactly one function overload.

Services SHOULD avoid ambiguity, i.e. the combination of the function
name, the unordered set of *non-optional* non-binding parameter names,
plus the binding parameter type for bound overloads SHOULD identify a
particular function overload. If there is ambiguity, then services MAY
return `400 Bad Request` with an error response body stating that the
request was ambiguous.

### ##subsubsec Actions

Actions are operations exposed by an OData service that MAY have side
effects when invoked. Actions MAY return data but MUST NOT be further
composed with additional path segments.

#### ##subsubsubsec Invoking an Action

To invoke an action bound to a resource, the client issues a `POST`
request to an action URL. An action URL may be
[obtained](#AdvertisingAvailableOperationswithinaPayload) from a previously
returned entity representation or constructed by appending the
namespace- or alias-qualified action name to a URL that identifies a
resource whose type is the same as, or derives from, the type of the
binding parameter of the action. The value for the binding parameter is
the resource identified by the URL preceding the action name, and only
the non-binding parameter values are passed in the request body
according to the particular format.
In parameters containing complex instances or transient entities,
properties with a defined default
value, nullable properties, and collection-valued properties that are omitted
from the request are interpreted as the default value, null, or an empty collection,
respectively.

Services MAY additionally support invoking actions using the unqualified
action name by defining one or more [default
namespaces](#DefaultNamespaces) through the
[Core.DefaultNamespace]{.term} term
defined in [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore).

To invoke an action through an action import, the client issues a `POST`
request to a URL identifying the action import. The canonical URL for an
action import is the service root, followed by the name of the action
import. When invoking an action through an action import all parameter
values MUST be passed in the request body according to the particular
format.

Non-binding single-valued parameters that are nullable or annotated with the term
[Core.OptionalParameter]{.term} defined in
[OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore) MAY be omitted from the request body.
If an omitted single-valued parameter is not annotated (and thus nullable), it MUST be
interpreted as having the `null` value. If it is annotated
and the annotation specifies a `DefaultValue`, the omitted
parameter is interpreted as having that default value. If omitted and
the annotation does not specify a default value, the service is free on
how to interpret the omitted parameter. Note: a nullable non-binding
parameter is equivalent to being annotated as optional with a default
value of `null`.

The interpretation of an omitted non-binding collection-valued parameter
is up to the service regardless of its nullability or optionality.
Possible interpretations include assuming an empty collection or,
for parameters not annotated as `Core.OptionalParameter`, reporting an error.

4.01 services MUST support invoking actions with no non-binding
parameters and parameterless action imports both without a request body
and with a request body representing no parameters, according to the
particular format. Interoperable clients SHOULD always include a request
body, even when invoking actions with no non-binding parameters and
parameterless action imports.

If the action returns results, the client SHOULD use content type
negotiation to request the results in the desired format, otherwise the
default content type will be used.

The client can request whether any results from the action be returned
using the [`return`](#Preferencereturnrepresentationandreturnminimal) preference.

If the invocation of an action results in the creation and return of a single entity,
that action invocation follows the rules for [entity creation](#CreateanEntity) and returns a
[`Location`](#HeaderLocation) header that contains the edit URL or read URL of the
created entity. Actions whose successful invocation always creates and returns a single entity MAY be annotated with the term
[Core.Constructor]{.term}
defined in [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore).

If the action returns a value of type `Edm.Stream`, the response to the `POST` request
follows the rules for [requesting stream properties](#RequestingStreamProperties).

Actions without a return type respond with
[`204 No Content`](#ResponseCode204NoContent) on success.

To request processing of the action only if the binding parameter value,
an entity or collection of entities, is unmodified, the client includes
the [`If-Match`](#HeaderIfMatch) header with the latest known ETag value
for the entity or collection of entities. The ETag value for a
collection as a whole is transported in the [`ETag`](#HeaderETag) header of a
collection response.

::: example
Example ##ex: invoke the `SampleEntities.CreateOrder` action using
`Customers('ALFKI')` as the customer (or binding parameter). The values
`2` for the `quantity` parameter and `BLACKFRIDAY` for the
`discountCode` parameter are passed in the body of the request. Invoke
the action only if the customer's ETag still matches.
```json
POST http://host/service/Customers('ALFKI')/SampleEntities.CreateOrder
If-Match: W/"MjAxOS0wMy0yMVQxMzowNVo="
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "items": [
    { "product": 4001, "quantity": 2 },
    { "product": 7062, "quantity": 1 },
  ],
  "discountCode": "BLACKFRIDAY"
}
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Action Overload Resolution

The same action name may be used multiple times within a schema provided
there is at most one unbound overload, and each bound overload specifies
a different binding parameter type.

If the action is bound and the binding parameter type is part of an
inheritance hierarchy, the action overload is selected based on the type
of the URL segment preceding the action name. A type-cast segment can be
used to select an action defined on a particular type in the hierarchy,
see [#OData-URL#AddressingDerivedTypes].

## ##subsec Asynchronous Requests

A [`Prefer`](#HeaderPrefer) header with a
[`respond-async`](#Preferencerespondasync) preference allows clients
to request that the service process a [Data Service
Request](#DataServiceRequests) asynchronously.

If the client has specified` respond-async` in the request, the service
MAY process the request asynchronously and return a
[`202 Accepted`](#ResponseCode202Accepted) response. A service MUST
NOT reply to a [Data Service Request](#DataServiceRequests) with
`202 Accepted` if the request has not included the `respond-async`
preference.

Responses that return `202 Accepted` MUST include a
[`Location`](#HeaderLocation) header pointing to a *status monitor resource* that
represents the current state of the asynchronous processing in addition
to an optional [`Retry-After`](#HeaderRetryAfter) header indicating the
time, in seconds, the client should wait before querying the service for
status. Services MAY include a response body, for example, to provide
additional status information.

A `GET` request to the status monitor resource again returns
`202 Accepted` response if the asynchronous processing has not finished.
This response MUST again include a [`Location`](#HeaderLocation) header
and MAY include a [`Retry-After`](#HeaderRetryAfter) header to be used for a subsequent request. The
`Location` header and optional `Retry-After` header may or may not
contain the same values as returned by the previous request.

Once the asynchronous processing has completed, a `GET` request to the status monitor resource returns [`200 OK`](#ResponseCode200OK),
or [`204 No Content`](#ResponseCode204NoContent) if the request included a `Prefer` header with a value of `return=minimal` that was applied by the service.
For OData 4.01 or greater responses, or OData 4.0 requests that include an `Accept` header that
does not specify `application/http`, the response MUST include the
[`AsyncResult`](#HeaderAsyncResult) response header.
A `204 No Content` response MUST include a `Location` header that contains the status monitor resource URL that can be used to request the result of the completed asynchronous operation. This may or may not be the current request's URL.
In a `200 OK` response any other headers,
along with the response body, represent the result of the completed
asynchronous operation. If the `GET` request to the status monitor
includes an `OData-MaxVersion` header with a value of `4.0` and no
`Accept` header, or an `Accept` header that includes `application/http`,
then the body of the final `200 OK` response MUST be represented as an
HTTP message, as described in [RFC9110](#rfc9110), which is the full
HTTP response to the completed asynchronous operation.

A `DELETE` request sent to the status monitor resource requests that the
asynchronous processing be canceled. A `200 OK` or a
`204 No Content` response indicates that the asynchronous processing has
been successfully canceled. A client can request that the `DELETE`
should be executed asynchronously. A `202 Accepted` response indicates
that the cancellation is being processed asynchronously; the client can
use the returned `Location` header (which MUST be
different from the status monitor resource of the initial request) to
query for the status of the cancellation. If a delete request is not
supported by the service, the service returns
[`405 Method Not Allowed`](#ResponseCode405MethodNotAllowed).

After a successful `DELETE` request against the status monitor resource,
any subsequent `GET` requests for the same status monitor resource
returns [`404 Not Found`](#ResponseCode404NotFound).

If an asynchronous request is cancelled for reasons other than the
consumers issuing a `DELETE` request against the status monitor
resource, a `GET` request to the status monitor resource returns
`200 OK` with a response body containing a single HTTP response with a
status code in the [`5xx Server Error`](#ServerErrorResponses) range indicating that the
operation was cancelled.

The service MUST ensure that no observable change has occurred as a
result of a canceled request.

If the client waits too long to request the result of the asynchronous
processing, the service responds with a [`410 Gone`](#ResponseCode410Gone) or
[`404 Not Found`](#ResponseCode404NotFound).

The status monitor resource URL MUST differ from any other resource URL.
