## ##subsec Batch Requests

Batch requests allow grouping multiple individual requests into a single
HTTP request payload. An individual request in the context of a batch
request is a [Metadata Request](#MetadataRequests), [Data
Request](#RequestingData), [Data Modification
Request](#DataModification), [Action invocation](#InvokinganAction)
request, or [Function invocation](#InvokingaFunction) request.

Batch requests are submitted as a single HTTP `POST` request to the
batch endpoint of a service, located at the URL `$batch` relative to the
service root.

Individual requests within a batch request are evaluated according to
the same semantics used when the request appears outside the context of
a batch request.

A batch request is represented using either the [multipart batch
format](#MultipartBatchFormat) defined in this document or the JSON
batch format defined in [#OData-JSON#BatchRequestsandResponses].

If the set of request headers of a batch request are valid the service
MUST return a [`200 OK`](#ResponseCode200OK) HTTP response code to
indicate that the batch request was accepted for processing, even if the
processing is yet to be completed. The individual requests within the
body of the batch request may be processed as soon as they are received,
this enables clients to stream batch requests, and batch implementations to stream the results.

If the service receives a batch request with an invalid set of headers
it MUST return a [`4xx` response code](#ClientErrorResponses) and
perform no further processing of the batch request.

### ##subsubsec Batch Request Headers

A batch request using the [multipart batch
format](#MultipartBatchFormat) MUST contain a
[`Content-Type`](#HeaderContentType) header specifying a content type of
`multipart/mixed` and a `boundary` parameter as defined in
[RFC2046](#rfc2046).

::: example
Example ##ex: multipart batch request
```
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: odata.org
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b

<Multipart Batch request body>
```
:::

A batch request using the JSON batch format MUST contain a
`Content-Type` header specifying a content type of `application/json`.

::: example
Example ##ex: JSON batch request
```
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: odata.org
OData-Version: 4.01
Content-Type: application/json

<JSON Batch request body>
```
:::

Batch requests SHOULD contain the applicable `OData-Version` header.

Batch requests SHOULD contain an [`Accept`](#HeaderAccept) header
specifying the desired batch response format, either `multipart/mixed`
or `application/json`. If no `Accept` header is provided, services
SHOULD respond with the content type of the request.

### ##subsubsec Request Dependencies

Requests within a batch may have dependencies on other requests
according to the particular batch format.

In the JSON format, requests may explicitly declare a dependency on
other requests that must be successfully processed before the current
request. In addition, requests may be specified as part of an *atomicity
group* whose members MUST either all succeed, or all fail. If a request
fails, then any dependent requests within the JSON format return
[`424 Failed Dependency`](#ResponseCode424FailedDependency).

In the Multipart format, [data modification](#DataModification) requests
or [action invocation](#InvokinganAction) requests may be grouped as
part of an atomic change set. Operations outside the change set are
executed sequentially, while operations within the change set may be
executed in any order.

### ##subsubsec Identifying Individual Requests

Each individual request within a batch request MAY have a request
identifier assigned. The request identifier is case-sensitive, MUST be
unique within the batch request, and MUST satisfy the rule [request-id]{.abnf}
in [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF).

The representation of the request identifier is format-specific, as are
the rules for which individual requests require an identifier.

### ##subsubsec Referencing Returned Entities

Entities created by an [insert](#CreateanEntity) request or an [action](#InvokinganAction) can be
referenced in the request URL of subsequent requests by using the
request identifier prefixed with a `$` character as the first segment of
the request URL. Services MUST treat this segment like the URL in the
[`Location`](#HeaderLocation) header of the response to the request identified by the segment.
If the `Location` header in the response to the subsequent request contains a relative URL,
clients MUST be able to resolve it relative to the request's URL even if
that contains such a reference. See [example ##batchcontentid].

If the `$`-prefixed request identifier is identical to the name of a
top-level system resource (`$batch`, `$crossjoin`, `$all`, `$entity`,
`$root`, `$id`, `$metadata`, or other system resources defined according
to the [`OData-Version`](#HeaderODataVersion) of the protocol specified
in the request), then the reference to the top-level system resource is
used. This collision can be avoided by e.g. using only numeric request
identifiers.

Services MAY also support referencing within request bodies, in which
case they SHOULD advertise this support by specifying the
`ReferencesInRequestBodiesSupported` property in the
[Capabilities.BatchSupport]{.term}
term applied to the entity container, see [OData-VocCap](#ODataVocCap).

### ##subsubsec Referencing the ETag of an Entity

Services MAY support the use of an ETag returned from a previous
operation in an [`If-Match`](#HeaderIfMatch) or
[`If-None-Match`](#HeaderIfNoneMatch) header of a subsequent statement.
Services SHOULD advertise this support by specifying the
`EtagReferencesSupported` property in the
[Capabilities.BatchSupport]{.term}
annotation term applied to the entity container, see
[OData-VocCap](#ODataVocCap).

The ETag for a previous operation can be referenced by using the request
identifier prefixed with a `$` character as the unquoted value of the
`If-Match` or `If-None-Match` header.

### ##subsubsec Referencing Values from Response Bodies

Services MAY support using values from a response body in the query part of
the URL or in the request body of subsequent requests. A value reference can
consist of a `$` character followed by the identifier of the preceding
request, then the referenced value is the value
represented by the response body of that preceding request. Alternatively, a value
reference can consist of a `$` character followed by the value of an instance annotation with term
[Core.ContentID]{.term}
(see [OData-VocCore](#ODataVocCore)) that occurs in the payload of the preceding request
as described in [section ##CreateRelatedEntitiesWhenCreatinganEntity] and
[section ##UpdateRelatedEntitiesWhenUpdatinganEntity],
then the referenced value is the corresponding value in the response,
which the service SHOULD annotate with the same `Core.ContentID` value.

In both cases, if the referenced value is a collection, the value reference MAY be followed by a
[collectionNavigationExpr]{.abnf}, as defined in [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF),
that is evaluated relative to the referenced value.
Otherwise the value reference MAY be followed by a forward slash and a
`memberExpr` that is evaluated relative to the referenced value.

If the `$`-prefixed identifier is identical to the name of a
predefined literal for query expressions (`$it`, `$root`, or other
literals defined according to the [`OData-Version`](#HeaderODataVersion)
of the protocol specified in the request), then the predefined literal
is used. This collision can be avoided by e.g. using only numeric
identifiers.

### ##subsubsec Multipart Batch Format

The multipart batch format is represented as a Multipart Media Type
message [RFC2046](#rfc2046), a standard format allowing the
representation of multiple parts, each of which may have a different
content type.

#### ##subsubsubsec Multipart Batch Request Body

The body of a multipart batch request is made up of a series of
individual requests and *change sets*, each represented as a distinct
body part (i.e. preceded by a boundary delimiter line consisting of two
dashes and the value of the `boundary` parameter specified in the
`Content-Type` header, and the last body part followed by a closing
boundary delimiter line consisting of two dashes, the boundary, and
another two dashes).

A body part representing an individual request MUST include a
`Content-Type` header with value `application/http`.

The contents of a body part representing a change set MUST itself be a
multipart document (see [RFC2046](#rfc2046)) with one body part for each
operation in the change set. Each body part
representing an operation in the change set MUST specify a `Content-ID`
header with a [request identifier](#IdentifyingIndividualRequests) that
is unique within the batch request.

A `Content-Transfer-Encoding` header with value `binary` may be included
for historic reasons although this header is not used by HTTP and only
needed for transmission via E-Mail. Neither clients nor services should
rely on this header being present.

Preambles and epilogues in the multipart batch request body, as defined
in [RFC2046](#rfc2046), are valid but are assigned no meaning and thus
MUST be ignored by processors of multipart batch requests.

The request URL of individual requests within a batch request or change
set can use one of the following three formats:

- Absolute URI with schema, host, port, and absolute resource path.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET https://host:1234/path/service/People(1) HTTP/1.1
```
:::

- Absolute resource path and separate `Host` header

::: example
Example ##ex_batchhost:
```json
PATCH /path/service/People(1) HTTP/1.1
Host: myserver.mydomain.org:1234
Content-Type: application/json

{ "Name": "Peter" }
```
:::

- Resource path relative to the batch request URI.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
DELETE People(1) HTTP/1.1
```
:::

Services MUST support all three formats for URLs of individual requests.

URLs must be correctly percent-encoded. For relative URLs this means
that colons in the path part, especially within key values, MUST be
percent-encoded to avoid confusion with the scheme separator. Colons
within the query part, i.e. after the question mark character (`?`),
need not be percent-encoded.

Each body part that represents a single request MUST NOT include:

- `authentication` or `authorization` related HTTP headers
- `Expect`, `From`, `Max-Forwards`, `Range`, or `TE` headers

Processors of batch requests MAY choose to disallow additional HTTP
constructs in HTTP requests serialized within body parts. For example, a
processor may choose to disallow chunked encoding to be used by such
HTTP requests.

::: example
Example ##ex_batchRequest: a batch request that contains the following individual
requests in the order listed

  1. A query request
  2. A change set that contains the following requests:
     - Insert entity (with `Content-ID = 1`)
     - Update entity (with `Content-ID = 2`)
  3. A second query request

Note: For brevity, in the example, request bodies are excluded in favor
of English descriptions inside `<>` brackets and `OData-Version` headers
are omitted.

Note also that the two empty lines after the `Host` header of the `GET`
request are necessary: the first is part of the `GET` request header;
the second is the empty body of the `GET` request, followed by a `CRLF`
according to [RFC2046](#rfc2046).
```
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: host
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Length: ###

--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http

GET /service/Customers('ALFKI')
Host: host


--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd

--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

POST /service/Customers HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of a new Customer>
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

PATCH /service/Customers('ALFKI') HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Content-Type: application/json
If-Match: xxxxx
Prefer: return=minimal
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of changes to Customer ALFKI>
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd--
--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http

GET /service/Products HTTP/1.1
Host: host


--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b--
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Referencing New Entities

Entities created by an [insert](#CreateanEntity) request or an [action](#InvokinganAction) can be
referenced in the request URL of subsequent requests within the same
change set. Services MAY also support referencing across change sets, in
which case they SHOULD advertise this support by specifying the
`ReferencesAcrossChangeSetsSupported` property in the
[Capabilities.BatchSupport]{.term}
term applied to the entity container, see [OData-VocCap](#ODataVocCap).

::: example
Example ##ex_batchcontentid: a batch request that contains the following operations in
the order listed:

A change set that contains the following requests:
- Insert a new entity (with `Content-ID = 1`)
- Insert a second new entity (references request with `Content-ID = 1`)

```
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: host
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Length: ###

--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd

--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

POST /service/Customers HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of a new Customer entity>
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

POST $1/Orders HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of a new Order>
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbd--
--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b--
```

The response contains relative `Location` headers.
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Length: ####
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77a

--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77a
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbe

--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbe
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 201 OK
Location: Customers('ALFKI')
…
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbe
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 201 OK
Location: Orders(1)
…
--changeset_77162fcd-b8da-41ac-a9f8-9357efbbe--
--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77a--
```
The second `Location` URL `Orders(1)` is relative with its base URI being the second
request URL `$1/Orders`. To get an absolute base URI, the client must replace the
`$1` with the first `Location` URL `Customers('ALFKI')` and resolve the
resulting URL `Customers('ALFKI')/Orders(1)` relative to its base URI, which is
`http://host/service/Customers` (determined from the
first request URL `/service/Customers` and the `Host: host` header
as in [example ##batchhost]). This gives the effective second request URL
`http://host/service/Customers('ALFKI')/Orders` as base URI for the second `Location`
URL, which therefore resolves to `http://host/service/Customers('ALFKI')/Orders(1)`.
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Referencing an ETag

::: example
Example ##ex: a batch request that contains the following operations in
the order listed:

- Get an employee (with `Content-ID = 1`)
- Update the salary only if the employee has not changed
```json
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: host
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Length: ###

--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

GET /service/Employees(0) HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Accept: application/json


--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

PATCH /service/Employees(0) HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###
If-Match: $1

{
   "Salary": 75000
}
--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b--
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Referencing Response Body Values

::: example
Example ##ex: a batch request that contains the following operations in
the order listed:

- Get an employee (with `Content-ID = 1`)
- Get all employees residing in the same building

```
POST /service/$batch HTTP/1.1
Host: host
OData-Version: 4.01
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Length: ###

--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

GET /service/Employees/0?$select=Building HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Accept: application/json


--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

GET /service/Employees?$filter=Building eq $1/Building HTTP/1.1
Host: host
Accept: application/json


--batch_36522ad7-fc75-4b56-8c71-56071383e77b--
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Processing a Multipart Batch Request

The service MUST process the individual requests and change sets within
a multipart batch request in the order received. Processing stops on the
first error unless the
[`continue-on-error`](#Preferencecontinueonerrorodatacontinueonerror) preference
is specified with an explicit or implicit value of `true`.

All requests in a change set represent a single change unit so a service
MUST successfully process and apply all the requests in the change set
or else apply none of them. See [section ##Atomicity] for details on visibility of atomic changes.
The service
MAY execute the requests within a change set in any order and MAY return
the responses to the individual requests in any order. If a request
specifies a request identifier, the service MUST include the
`Content-ID` header with the request identifier in the corresponding
response so clients can correlate requests and responses.

#### ##subsubsubsec Multipart Batch Response

A multipart response to a batch request MUST contain a `Content-Type`
header with value `multipart/mixed`.

The body of a multipart response to a multipart batch request MUST
structurally match one-to-one with the multipart batch request body,
such that the same multipart message structure defined for requests is
used for responses. There are three exceptions to this rule:

- When a request within a change set
fails, the change set response is not represented using the
`multipart/mixed` media type. Instead, a single response, using the
`application/http` media type, is returned that applies to all requests
in the change set and MUST be a valid OData error response.
- When an error occurs processing a
request and the
[`continue-on-error`](#Preferencecontinueonerrorodatacontinueonerror) preference
is not specified, or specified with an explicit value of `false`,
processing of the batch is terminated and the error response is the last
part of the multipart response.
- [Asynchronously processed batch
requests](#AsynchronousBatchRequests) can return interim results and end
with a `202 Accepted` as the last part of the multipart response.
Therefore, the [`respond-async`](#Preferencerespondasync) preference
MUST NOT be applied to individual requests within a batch if the batch
response is a multipart response.

The body of a multipart response to a JSON batch request contains one
body part for each processed or accepted request. The order of the body
parts is insignificant as each body part MUST contain the `Content-ID`
header with the value of the `id` name/value pair of the corresponding
request object.

A response to an operation in a batch MUST be formatted exactly as it
would have appeared outside of a batch as described in the corresponding
subsections of chapter [Data Service Requests](#DataServiceRequests).
Relative URLs in each individual response are relative to the request
URL of the corresponding individual request (see [example ##batchcontentid]).
URLs in responses MUST NOT contain `$`-prefixed request identifiers.

::: example
Example ##ex: referencing the batch request [example ##batchRequest] above, assume all
the requests except the final query request succeed. In this case the
response would be
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Length: ####
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=b_243234_25424_ef_892u748

--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of the Customer entity with key ALFKI>
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037

--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json
Location: http://host/service.svc/Customer('POIUY')
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of the new Customer entity>
--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

HTTP/1.1 204 No Content


--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037--
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
Content-Type: application/xml
Content-Length: ###

<Error message>
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748---
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Asynchronous Batch Requests

Batch requests MAY be executed asynchronously by including the
[`respond-async`](#Preferencerespondasync) preference in the
[`Prefer`](#HeaderPrefer) header. If the service responds with a
multipart batch response, it MUST ignore the `respond-async` preference
for individual requests within a batch.

After successful execution of the batch request the response to the
batch request is returned in the body of a response to an interrogation
request against the *status monitor resource* URL (see [Asynchronous
Requests](#AsynchronousRequests)).

A service MAY return interim results to an asynchronously executing
batch. It does this by responding with [`200 OK`](#ResponseCode200OK) to a `GET` request to
the monitor resource and including a
[`202 Accepted`](#ResponseCode202Accepted) response as the last part of
the multipart response. The client can use the monitor URL returned in
this `202 Accepted` response to continue
processing the batch response.

Since a change set is executed atomically,
`202 Accepted` MUST NOT be returned within
a change set.

::: example
Example ##ex: referencing the [example ##batchRequest] above again, assume that
```
HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted
Location: http://service-root/async-monitor-0
Retry-After: ###

```

When interrogating the monitor URL only the first request in the batch
has finished processing and all the remaining requests are still being
processed. Note that the actual multipart batch response itself is
contained in an `application/http` wrapper as it is a response to a
status monitor resource:
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Length: ####
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=b_243234_25424_ef_892u748

--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of the Customer entity with key ALFKI>
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted
Location: http://service-root/async-monitor
Retry-After: ###


--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748--
```

After some time the client makes a second request using the returned
monitor URL, not explicitly accepting
`application/http`. The batch is completely processed and the response is the final result.
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
AsyncResult: 200
OData-Version: 4.0
Content-Length: ####
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=b_243234_25424_ef_892u748

--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037

--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 1

HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json
Location: http://host/service.svc/Customer('POIUY')
Content-Length: ###

<JSON representation of a new Customer entity>
--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037
Content-Type: application/http
Content-ID: 2

HTTP/1.1 204 No Content


--cs_12u7hdkin252452345eknd_383673037--
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748
Content-Type: application/http

HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
Content-Type: application/xml
Content-Length: ###

<Error message>
--b_243234_25424_ef_892u748--
```
:::
