
-------

# ##sec System Query Option `$apply`

A _set transformation_ (_transformation_ for short) is an operation on an input set that produces an output set. A _transformation sequence_ is a sequence of set transformations, separated by forward slashes to express that they are consecutively applied. A transformation sequence may be invoked using the system query option `$apply`. The input set of the first set transformation is the collection addressed by the resource path. The output set of each set transformation is the input set for the next set transformation. The output set of the last set transformation in the transformation sequence invoked by the system query option `$apply` is the result of `$apply`. This is consistent with the use of service-defined bound and composable functions in path segments. Set transformations may also appear as a parameter of certain other set transformations defined below.

The system query option `$apply` MUST NOT be used if the resource path addresses a single instance.

The system query option `$apply` is evaluated first, then the other system query options are evaluated, if applicable, on the result of `$apply`, see [#OData-Protocol#SystemQueryOptions]. Stability across requests for system query options `$top` and `$skip` [#OData-Protocol#SystemQueryOptiontop] is defined in [section ##StableTotalOrderBeforeskipandtop].

Each set transformation:
- carries over the input type to the output set such that it fits into the data model of the service.
- can mark certain navigation properties and stream properties for _expansion by default_, that is, they are expanded in the result of `$apply` in the absence of an `$expand` query option.
- may produce an output set with a different number of instances than the input set.
- does not necessarily guarantee that all properties of the instances in the output set have a well-defined value.

Instances of an output set can contain structural and navigation properties, which can be declared or dynamic, as well as instance annotations.

The allowed set transformations are defined in this section as well as in the section on [Hierarchical Transformations](#HierarchicalTransformations).

Service-defined bound functions that take a collection of instances of a structured type as their binding parameter and return a collection of instances of a structured type MAY be used as set transformations within `$apply`. Further transformations can follow the bound function. The parameter syntax for bound function segments is identical to the parameter syntax for bound functions in resource path segments or `$filter` expressions. See [section ##ModelFunctionsasSetTransformations] for an example.

Parameter aliases [#OData-URL#ParameterAliases] can be used inside the value of `$apply` wherever the ABNF rule `applyTrafo` [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF) is reduced to a [commonExpr]{.abnf} [#OData-URL#CommonExpressionSyntax] or a `collectionExpr` ([section ##ExpressionsEvaluableonaCollection]).

If a data service that supports `$apply` does not support it on the collection identified by the request resource path, it MUST fail with `501 Not Implemented` and a meaningful human-readable error message.

On resource paths ending in `/$count` the system query option `$apply` is evaluated on the set identified by the resource path without the `/$count` segment, the result is the plain-text number of items in the result of `$apply`. This is similar to the combination of `/$count` and `$filter`.

During serialization of the result of `$apply` declared properties and dynamic properties are represented as defined by the response format. Other properties have been aggregated away and are not represented in the response. The entities returned in the request examples in the following sections that involve aggregation are therefore transient.

## ##subsec Fundamentals of Input and Output Sets

The definitions of italicized terms made in this section are used throughout this text, always with a hyperlink to this section.

### ##subsubsec Type, Structure and Context URL

All input sets and output sets in one transformation sequence are collections of the _input type_, that is the entity type or complex type of the first input set, or in other words, of the resource to which the transformation sequence is applied. The input type is determined by the entity model element identified within the metadata document by the context URL of that resource [#OData-Protocol#ContextURL]. Individual instances in an input or output set can have a subtype of the input type. (See [example ##subinputtype].) The transformation sequence given as the `$apply` system query option is applied to the resource addressed by the resource path. The transformations defined below can have nested transformation sequences as parameters, these are then applied to resources that can differ from the current input set.

The _structure_ of an instance that occurs in an input or output set is defined by the names of the structural and navigation properties that the instance contains. Instances of an input type can have different structures, subject to the following rules:
- Declared properties of the input type or a nested or related type thereof or of a subtype of one of these MUST have their declared type and meaning when they occur in an input or output set.
- Single- or collection-valued primitive properties addressed by a property path starting at a non-transient entity MUST keep their values from the addressed resource path collection throughout the transformation sequence. Likewise, single- or collection-valued navigation property paths starting at a non-transient entity MUST keep addressing the same non-transient entities as in the addressed resource path collection.
- Instances in an output set need not have all declared or dynamic properties that occurred in the input set.
- Instances in an output set can have dynamic properties that did not occur in the input set. The name for such a dynamic property is called an _alias_, it is a simple identifier (see [#OData-CSDL#SimpleIdentifier]). Aliases MUST differ from names of declared properties in the input type, from names of properties in the first input set, and from names of properties in the current input set. Aliases in one collection MUST also differ from each other.
- Instances in an output set that have all key properties of an entity also have the metadata associated with that entity, such as entity-id, read and edit URL (defined in [#OData-Protocol#ServiceModel]) and ETag (defined in [#OData-Protocol#UseofETagsforAvoidingUpdateConflicts]) as well as relations to other entities  [#OData-Protocol#RequestingRelatedEntities].

Here is an overview of the structural changes made by different transformations:
- During [aggregation](#BasicAggregation) or [nest](#Transformationnest), many instances are replaced by one instance, properties that represent the aggregation level are retained, and others are replaced by dynamic properties holding the aggregate value of the many instances or a transformed copy of them.
- During [compute](#Transformationcompute), dynamic properties are added to each instance.
- During [addnested](#Transformationaddnested), dynamic properties are added to each occurrence of a related collection.
- During [join](#Transformationsjoinandouterjoin), one instance with a collection of related instances is replaced by many copies, each of which is related via a dynamic property to one of the related instances.
- During [concatenation](#Transformationconcat), the same instances are transformed multiple times and the output sets with their potentially different structures are concatenated.

An output set thus consists of instances with different structures. This is the same situation as with a collection of an open type ([#OData-CSDL#OpenEntityType] and [#OData-CSDL#OpenComplexType]) and it is handled in the same way.

If the first input set is a collection of entities from a given entity set, then so are all input sets and output sets in the transformation sequence. The `{select-list}` in the context URL [#OData-Protocol#ContextURL] MUST describe only properties that are present or annotated as absent (for example, if `Core.Permissions` is `None` [#OData-Protocol#RequestingIndividualEntities]) in all instances of the collection, after applying any `$select` and `$expand` system query options. The `{select-list}` SHOULD describe as many such properties as possible, even if the request involves a concatenation that leads to a non-homogeneous structure. If the server cannot determine any such properties, the `{select-list}` MUST consist of just the instance annotation `AnyStructure` defined in the [`Core` vocabulary]($$$OData-VocCore$$$#AnyStructure). (See [example ##anystructure].)

### ##subsubsec Sameness and Order

Input sets and output sets are not sets of instances in the mathematical sense but collections, because the same instance can occur multiple times in them. In other words: A collection contains values (which can be instances of structured types or primitive values), possibly with repetitions. The occurrences of the values in the collection form a set in the mathematical sense. The _cardinality_ of a collection is the total number of occurrences in it. When this text describes a transformation algorithmically and stipulates that certain steps are carried out _for each occurrence_ in a collection, this means that the steps are carried out multiple times for the same value if it occurs multiple times in the collection.

A collection addressed by the resource path is returned by the service either as an ordered collection [#OData-Protocol#ManagingMembersofanOrderedCollection] or as an unordered collection. The same applies to collections that are nested in or related to the addressed resource as well as to collections that are the result of evaluating an expression starting with `$root`, which occur, for example, as the first parameter of a [hierarchical transformation](#HierarchicalTransformations).

But when such a collection is transformed by the `$apply` system query option, additional cases can arise that are neither ordered nor totally unordered. For example, the [`groupby`](#Transformationgroupby) transformation retains any order within a group but not between groups.

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex: Request the top 10 sales per customer. The processing of the request can be parallelized per customer and the responses per customer can be interleaved in the overall response. This means that for any given customer, their top 10 sales appear in the desired order, though not consecutively.
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Customer),orderby(Amount desc)/top(10))
```
:::

For every transformation defined in the following sections, it will be specified how it orders its output set, based on the order of its input set. The order of the last output set can be further influenced by a `$orderby` system query option before it is observed in the response payload.

An order of a collection is more precisely defined as follows: Given two different occurrences $u_1$ and $u_2$ in a collection, which may be of the same value or of different values, $u_1$ precedes $u_2$ or $u_2$ precedes $u_1$, but not both. It can be neither, in which case the relative order of $u_1$ and $u_2$ does not matter. If $u_1$ precedes $u_2$ and $u_2$ precedes $u_3$, then $u_1$ also precedes $u_3$, and $u_1$ never precedes $u_1$. (This is a partial order in the mathematical sense defined on the set of occurrences.)

When transformations are defined in the following sections, the algorithmic description sometimes contains an _order-preserving loop_ over a collection. Such a loop processes the occurrences in an order chosen by the service in such a way that $u_1$ is processed before $u_2$ whenever $u_1$ precedes $u_2$. Likewise, in an _order-preserving sequence_ $u_1,…,u_n$ we have $i<j$ whenever $u_i$ precedes $u_j$.

A collection can be _stable-sorted_ by a list of expressions. In the stable-sorted collection an occurrence $u_1$ precedes $u_2$ if and only if either
- $u_1$ precedes $u_2$ according to the rules of [#OData-Protocol#SystemQueryOptionorderby] or
- these rules do not determine a precedence in either direction between $u_1$ and $u_2$ but $u_1$ preceded $u_2$ in the collection before the sort.

Stable-sorting of an ordered collection produces another ordered collection. A stable-sort does not necessarily produce a total order, the sorted collection may still contain two occurrences whose relative order does not matter. The transformation [`orderby`](#Transformationorderby) performs a stable-sort.

The output set of a [basic aggregation](#BasicAggregation) transformation can contain instances of an entity type without entity-id. After a [`concat`](#Transformationconcat) transformation, different occurrences of the same entity can differ in individual non-declared properties. To account for such cases, the definition of sameness given in [#OData-URL#Equals] is refined here. Instances of structured types are _the same_ if
- both are instances of complex types and both are null or both have the same structure and same values with null considered different from absent or
- both are instances of entity types without entity-id (see [#OData-Protocol#TransientEntities]) and both are null or both have the same structure and same values with null considered different from absent (informally speaking, they are compared like complex instances) or
- (1) both are instances of the same entity type with the same entity-id (non-transient entities, see [#OData-Protocol#EntityIdsandEntityReferences]) and (2) the structural and navigation properties contained in both have the same values (for non-primitive properties the sameness of values is decided by a recursive invocation of this definition).
  - If this is fulfilled, the instances are called _complementary representations of the same non-transient entity_. If this case is encountered at some recursion level while the sameness of non-transient entities $u_1$ and $u_2$ is established, a merged representation of the entity $u_1=u_2$ exists that contains all properties of $u_1$ and $u_2$. But if the instances both occur in the last output set, services MUST represent each with its own structure in the response payload.
  - If the first condition is fulfilled but not the second, the instances are not the same and are called _contradictory representations of the same non-transient entity_. ([Example ##contradict] describes a use case for this.)

Collections are _the same_ if there is a one-to-one correspondence $f$ between them such that
- corresponding occurrences are of the same value and
- an occurrence $u_1$ precedes another occurrence $u_2$ if and only if the occurrence $f(u_1)$ precedes the occurrence $f(u_2)$, where the occurrences $u_1$ and $u_2$ may be of the same value or of different values. (A one-to-one correspondence with this second property is called _order-preserving_.)

### ##subsubsec Evaluation of Data Aggregation Paths

This document specifies how a [data aggregation path](#DataAggregationPath) that occurs in a request is evaluated by the service. If such an evaluation fails, the service MUST reject the request.

For a data aggregation path to be a common expression according to [#OData-URL#CommonExpressionSyntax], its segments must be single-valued with the possible exception of the last segment, and it can then be evaluated relative to an instance of a structured type. For the transformations defined in this document, a data aggregation path can also be evaluated relative to a collection $A$, even if it has arbitrary collection-valued segments itself.

To this end, the following notation is used in the subsequent sections: If $A$ is a collection and $p$ a data aggregation path, optionally followed by a type-cast segment, the result of such a path evaluation is denoted by $\Gamma(A,p)$ and defined as the unordered concatenation, possibly containing repetitions, of the collections $γ(u,p)$ for each $u$ in $A$ that is not null. The function $γ(u,p)$ takes a non-null value and a path as arguments and returns a collection of instances of structured types or primitive values, depending on the type of the final segment of $p$. It is recursively defined as follows:
1. If $p$ is an empty path, let $B$ be a collection with $u$ as its single member and continue with step 9.
2. Let $p_1$ be the first segment of $p$ and $p_2$ the remainder, if any, such that $p$ equals the concatenated path $p_1/p_2$.
3. If $p_1$ is a type-cast segment and $u$ is of its type or a subtype thereof, let $v=u$ and continue with step 8.
4. If $p_1$ is a type-cast segment and $u$ is not of its type or a subtype thereof, let $B$ be an empty collection and continue with step 9. (This rule follows [#OData-URL#AddressingDerivedTypes] rather than [#OData-CSDL#PathSyntax].)
5. Otherwise, $p_1$ is a non-type-cast segment. If $u$ does not contain a structural or navigation property $p_1$, let $B$ be an empty collection and continue with step 9.
6. If $p_1$ is single-valued, let $v$ be the value of the structural or navigation property $p_1$ in $u$. If $v$ is null, let $B$ be an empty collection and continue with step 9; otherwise continue with step 8.
7. Otherwise, $p_1$ is collection-valued. Let $C$ be the collection addressed by the structural or navigation property $p_1$ in $u$, and let $B=\Gamma(C,p_2)$. Then continue with step 9.
8. Let $B=γ(v,p_2)$.
9. Return $B$.

This notation is extended to the case of an empty path $e$ by setting $\Gamma(A,e)=A$ with null values removed. Note the collections returned by $\Gamma$ and $γ$ never contain the null value. Also, every instance $u$ in $\Gamma(A,p)$ occurs also in $A$ or nested into $A$, therefore an algorithmic step like "Add a dynamic property to each $u$ in $\Gamma(A,p)$" effectively changes $A$.
