## ##subsec Basic Aggregation

### ##subsubsec Transformation `aggregate`

#### ##subsubsubsec Aggregation Algorithm

The `aggregate` transformation takes a comma-separated list of one or more _aggregate expressions_ as parameters and returns an output set with a single instance of the [input type](#TypeStructureandContextURL) without entity-id containing one property per aggregate expression, representing the aggregated value of the input set.

An aggregate expression MUST have one of the types listed below. To compute the value of the property for a given aggregate expression, the `aggregate` transformation first determines a collection $A$ of instances or primitive values, based on the input set of the `aggregate` transformation, and a path $p$ that occurs in the aggregate expression. Let $p_1$ denote a [data aggregation path](#DataAggregationPath) with single- or collection-valued segments and $p_2$ a type-cast segment. Depending on the type of aggregate expression, $p=p_1$ or $p=p_2$ or $p=p_1/p_2$. Each type of aggregate expression defines a function $f(A)$ which the aggregate transformation evaluates to obtain the property value.

The property is a dynamic property, except for a special case in type 4. In types 1 and 2, the aggregate expression MUST end with the keyword `with` and an aggregation method $g$. The aggregation method also determines the type of the dynamic property. In types 1, 2 and 3 the aggregate expression MUST, and in type 4 it MAY, be followed by the keyword [`as`](#Keywordas) and an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL), which is then the name of the dynamic property. More aggregate expressions can be constructed with the [`from`](#Keywordfrom) keyword, see later section.

_Types of aggregate expressions:_
1. A path $p=p_1$ or $p=p_1/p_2$ where the last segment of $p_1$ has a complex or entity or [aggregatable primitive type](#AggregatablePrimitiveType) whose values can be aggregated using the specified [aggregation method](#AggregationMethods) $g$, or $p=p_2$ if the input set can be aggregated using the [custom aggregation method](#CustomAggregationMethods) $g$.  
Let $f(A)=g(A)$.
2. An [aggregatable expression](#AggregatableExpression).  
Let $f(A)=g(B)$ where $B$ is the collection consisting of the aggregatable expression evaluated relative to each member of $A$ with null values removed from $B$. In this type, $p$ is absent.
3. A path $p/{\tt\$count}$ (see [section ##AggregateExpressioncount]) with optional prefix $p/{}$ where $p=p_1$ or $p=p_2$ or $p=p_1/p_2$.  
Let $f(A)$ be the [cardinality](#SamenessandPrecedence) of $A$.
4. A path $p/c$ consisting of an optional prefix $p/{}$ with $p=p_1$ or $p=p_1/p_2$ where the last segment of $p_1$ has a structured type or $p=p_2$, and a [custom aggregate](#CustomAggregates) $c$ defined on the collection addressed by $p$.  
Let $f(A)=c(A)$, if computation of the custom aggregate fails, the service MUST reject the request. In the absence of an alias, the name of the property MUST be the name of the custom aggregate, this is a dynamic property unless there is a declared property with that name, which is allowed by the `CustomAggregate` annotation. The custom aggregate also determines the type of the dynamic property.

_Determination of $A$:_

Let $I$ be the input set. If $p$ is absent, let $A=I$ with null values removed.

Otherwise, let $q$ be the portion of $p$ up to and including the last navigation property, if any, and any type-cast segment that immediately follows, and let $r$ be the remainder, if any, of $p$ that contains no navigation properties, such that $p$ equals the concatenated path $q⁄r$. The aggregate transformation considers each entity reached via the path $q$ exactly once. To this end, using the [$\Gamma$ notation](#EvaluationofDataAggregationPaths):
- If $q$ is non-empty, let $E=\Gamma(I,q)$ and remove duplicates from that entity collection: If [multiple representations of the same non-transient entity](#SamenessandPrecedence) are reached, the service MUST merge them into one occurrence in $E$ if they are complementary and MUST reject the request if they are contradictory. (See [example ##aggrconflict].) If [multiple occurrences of the same transient entity](#SamenessandPrecedence) are reached, the service MUST keep only one occurrence in $E$.
- If $q$ is empty, let $E=I$.

Then, if $r$ is empty, let $A=E$, otherwise let $A=\Gamma(E,r)$, this consists of instances or primitive values, possibly with repetitions.

#### ##subsubsubsec Keyword `as`

Aggregate expressions can define an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL) which follows the `as` keyword.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total,
                                    Amount with max as MxA)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Total, MxA)",
  "value": [
    { "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 24,
      "MxA@odata.type": "Decimal", "MxA": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex_aggrmul:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount mul Product/TaxRate
                                    with sum as Tax)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Tax)",
  "value": [
    { "Tax@odata.type": "Decimal", "Tax": 2.08 }
  ]
}
```
:::

An alias affects the structure of the output set: each alias corresponds to a dynamic property in a `$select` option.

#### ##subsubsubsec Aggregation Methods

Values can be aggregated using the standard aggregation methods [`sum`](#StandardAggregationMethodsum), [`min`](#StandardAggregationMethodmin), [`max`](#StandardAggregationMethodmax), [`average`](#StandardAggregationMethodaverage), and [`countdistinct`](#StandardAggregationMethodcountdistinct), or with [custom aggregation methods](#CustomAggregationMethods) defined by the service. Only types 1 and 2 of the [aggregation algorithm](#AggregationAlgorithm) involve aggregation methods, and the algorithm ensures that no null values occur among the values to be aggregated.

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Standard Aggregation Method `sum`

The standard aggregation method `sum` can be applied to numeric values to return the sum of the values, or null if there are no values to be aggregated. The provider MUST choose a single type for the property across all instances of that type in the result that is capable of representing the aggregated values. This may require a larger integer type, `Edm.Decimal` with sufficient `Precision` and `Scale`, or `Edm.Double`.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Total)",
  "value": [
    { "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 24 }
  ]
}
```
:::

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Standard Aggregation Method `min`

The standard aggregation method `min` can be applied to values with a totally ordered domain to return the smallest of the values, or null if there are no values to be aggregated.

The result property will have the same type as the input property.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with min as MinAmount)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(MinAmount)",
  "value": [
    { "MinAmount@odata.type": "Decimal", "MinAmount": 1 }
  ]
}
```
:::

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Standard Aggregation Method `max`

The standard aggregation method `max` can be applied to values with a totally ordered domain to return the largest of the values, or null if there are no values to be aggregated.

The result property will have the same type as the input property

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with max as MaxAmount)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(MaxAmount)",
  "value": [
    { "MaxAmount@odata.type": "Decimal", "MaxAmount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Standard Aggregation Method `average`

The standard aggregation method `average` can be applied to numeric values to return the sum of the non-null values divided by the count of the values, or null if there are no values to be aggregated.

The provider MUST choose a single type for the property across all instances of that type in the result that is capable of representing the aggregated values; either `Edm.Double` or `Edm.Decimal` with sufficient `Precision` and `Scale`.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with average as AverageAmount)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(AverageAmount)",
  "value": [
    { "AverageAmount@odata.type": "Decimal", "AverageAmount": 3.0 }
  ]
}
```
:::

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Standard Aggregation Method `countdistinct`

The aggregation method `countdistinct` can be applied to arbitrary collections to count the distinct values. Instance comparison uses the definition of equality in [OData-URL, section 5.1.1.1.1](#ODataURL).

The result property MUST have type `Edm.Decimal` with `Scale` 0 and sufficient `Precision`.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Product with countdistinct
                                    as DistinctProducts)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(DistinctProducts)",
  "value": [
    { "DistinctProducts@odata.type": "Decimal", "DistinctProducts": 3 }
  ]
}
```
:::

The number of instances in the input set can be counted with the [aggregate expression `$count`](#AggregateExpressioncount).

##### ##subsubsubsubsec Custom Aggregation Methods

Services can define custom aggregation methods if the functionality offered by the standard aggregation methods is not sufficient for the intended consumers.

Custom aggregation methods MUST use a namespace-qualified name (see [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF)), i.e. contain at least one dot. Dot-less names are reserved for future versions of this specification.

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex: custom aggregation method that concatenates distinct string values separated by commas
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Customer/Country),
                   aggregate(Amount with sum as Total,
                             Product/Name with Custom.concat as ProductNames))
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Customer(Country),Total,ProductNames)",
  "value": [
    { "Customer": { "Country": "Netherlands" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  5,
      "ProductNames": "Paper,Sugar" },
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 19,
      "ProductNames": "Coffee,Paper,Sugar" }
  ]
}
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Aggregate Expression `$count`

The aggregate expression `$count` is defined as type 3 in the [aggregation algorithm](#AggregationAlgorithm). It MUST always specify an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL) and MUST NOT specify an [aggregation method](#AggregationMethods).

The result property MUST have type `Edm.Decimal` with `Scale` 0 and sufficient `Precision`.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate($count as SalesCount)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(SalesCount)",
  "value": [
    { "SalesCount@odata.type": "Decimal", "SalesCount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

#### ##subsubsubsec Keyword `from`

The `from` keyword offers a shortcut for a sequence of [`groupby`](Transformationgroupby) and [`aggregate`](#Transformationaggregate) transformations with the pattern ${\tt groupby}(…,{\tt aggregate}(…{\tt\ as\ }A_1))/{\tt aggregate}(A_1{\tt\ with\ }…)$.

In the following $p_1,…,p_n$ are [data aggregation paths](#DataAggregationPath) that are allowed in `groupby` for [simple grouping](#SimpleGrouping).

1. If $α$ is an aggregate expression and $g$ is an aggregation method, then
   $$α{\tt\ from\ }p_1,…,p_n{\tt\ with\ }g$$
   is an aggregate expression which evaluates to the value of property $D$ in the single instance in the output set of the following transformation sequence:
   $${\tt groupby}((p_1,…,p_n),{\tt aggregate}(α{\tt\ as\ }A_1))/{\tt aggregate}(A_1{\tt\ with\ }g{\tt\ as\ }D).$$
2. If $α=p/c{\tt\ from\ }…$ is an aggregate expression that starts with a custom aggregate $c$, optionally prefixed with a path $p$ as in type 4 in the [aggregation algorithm](#AggregationAlgorithm), and that optionally continues with `from` and `with` clauses, then
   $$α{\tt\ from\ }p_1,…,p_n$$
   is an aggregate expression which evaluates to the value of property $c$ in the single instance in the output set of the following transformation sequence:
   $${\tt groupby}((p_1,…,p_n),{\tt aggregate}(α{\tt\ as\ }A_1))/{\tt aggregate}(p/c).$$

Aggregate expressions constructed by these rules MUST be followed in the `aggregate` transformation by the keyword `as` and an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL). These rules can be applied repeatedly and lead to multiple `from` clauses in one aggregate expression.

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex_from: illustrates rule 1 where $α={\tt Amount\ with\ sum}$, $p_1={\tt Time}$, $g={\tt average}$
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with sum from Time with average
                                    as DailyAverage)
```
is equivalent to (but avoids the intermediate dynamic property `Total`)
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Time),aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
                  /aggregate(Total with average as DailyAverage)
```
and results in the average sales volume per day
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(DailyAverage)",
  "value": [
    { "DailyAverage@odata.type": "Decimal", "DailyAverage": 3.428571428571429 }
  ]
}
```
:::

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex: illustrates rule 1 where $α={\tt Forecast}$, $p_1={\tt Time}$, $g={\tt average}$
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Forecast from Time with average
                                    as DailyAverage)
```
is equivalent to
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Time),aggregate(Forecast))
                  /aggregate(Forecast with average as DailyAverage)
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Transformation `concat`

The `concat` transformation takes two or more parameters, each of which is a sequence of set transformations.

It applies each transformation sequence to the input set and concatenates the intermediate output sets in the order of the parameters into the output set, preserving the ordering of the individual output sets as well as the structure of each instance in these sets, potentially leading to a non-homogeneously structured output set. If different intermediate output sets contain dynamic properties with the same alias, clients SHOULD ensure they have the same type and meaning in each intermediate output set.

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=concat(topcount(2,Amount),
                                 aggregate(Amount))
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Amount)",
  "value": [
    { "ID": 4, "Amount": 8 },
    { "ID": 3, "Amount": 4 },
    { "Amount": 24 }
  ]
}
```
Note that two Sales entities with the second highest amount 4 exist in the input set; the entity with `ID` 3 is included in the result, because the service chose to use the `ID` property for imposing a stable ordering.
:::

The output set of `concat` has a mixed form consisting of the structures imposed by the two transformation sequences.

### ##subsubsec Transformation groupby

The `groupby` transformation takes one or two parameters where the second is a list of set transformations, separated by forward slashes to express that they are consecutively applied. If the second parameter is not specified, it defaults to a single transformation whose output set consists of a single instance of the [input type](#TypeStructureandContextURL) without properties and without entity-id.

#### ##subsubsubsec Simple Grouping

In its simplest form the first parameter of `groupby` specifies the _grouping properties_, a comma-separated parenthesized list $G$ of one or more [data aggregation paths](#DataAggregationPath) with single-valued segments. The same path SHOULD NOT appear more than once; redundant property paths MAY be considered valid, but MUST NOT alter the meaning of the request. Navigation properties and stream properties specified in grouping properties are expanded by default (see [example ##groupbynav]).

The algorithmic description of this transformation makes use of the following definitions: Let $u[q]$ denote the value of a structural or navigation property $q$ in an instance $u$. A path $p_1$ is called a _prefix_ of a path $p$ if there is a non-empty path $p_2$ such that $p$ equals the concatenated path $p_1/p_2$. Let $e$ denote the empty path.

The output set of the groupby transformation is constructed in five steps.
1. [For each](#SamenessandPrecedence) instance $u$ in the input set, a projection is computed that contains only the grouping properties. This projection is $s_G(u,e)$ and the function $s_G(u,p)$ takes an instance and a path relative to the input set as arguments and is computed recursively as follows:
   - Let $v$ be an instance of the type of $u$ without properties and without entity-id.
   - For each structural or navigation property $q$ of $u$:
     - If $u$ has a subtype of the type addressed by $p$ and $q$ is only declared on that subtype, let $p'=p/p''/q$ where $p''$ is a type-cast to the subtype, otherwise let $p'=p/q$.
     - If $p'$ occurs in $G$, let $v[q]=u[q]$.
     - Otherwise, if $p'$ is a prefix of a path in $G$, let $v[q]=s_G(u[q],p')$.
   - Return $v$.
2. The input set is split into subsets where two instances are in the same subset if their projections are [the same](#SamenessandPrecedence). If [representations of the same non-transient entity](#SamenessandPrecedence) are encountered during the comparison of two projections, the service MUST assign them to one subset with the merged representation if they are complementary and MUST reject the request if they are contradictory.
3. The set transformations from the second parameter are applied to each subset, resulting in a new set of potentially different structure and cardinality. Associated with each resulting set is the common projection of the instances in the subset from which the resulting set was computed.
4. Each set resulting from the previous step is transformed to contain the associated common projection $s$. This transformation is denoted by $\Pi_G(s)$ and is defined below.
5. The output set is the concatenation of the transformed sets from the previous step. Precedence between occurrences from the same transformed set remains the same, and no precedence is defined between occurrences from different transformed sets.

_Definition of $\Pi_G(s)$:_

_Prerequisites:_ $G$ is a list of data aggregation paths and $s$ is an instance of the [input type](#TypeStructureandContextURL).

The output set of the transformation $\Pi_G(s)$ is in one-to-one correspondence with its input set via the [order-preserving](#SamenessandPrecedence) mapping $u↦a_G(u,s,e)$. The function $a_G(u,s,p)$ takes two instances and a path relative to the input set as arguments and is computed recursively as follows:
1. If necessary, cast $u$ to a subtype so that its type contains all structural and navigation properties of $s$.
2. For each structural or navigation property $q$ of $s$:
   - If $s$ has a subtype of the type addressed by $p$ and $q$ is only declared on that subtype, let $p'=p/p''/q$ where $p''$ is a type-cast to the subtype, otherwise let $p'=p/q$.
   - If $q$ is a single-valued primitive structural property or $p'$ occurs in $G$, let $u[q]=s[q]$. (In the case where $p'$ occurs in $G$ we also call $q$ a _final segment from $G$_.)
   - Otherwise, if $q$ is single-valued, let $u[q]=a_G(u[q],s[q],p')$.
   - Otherwise, the behavior is undefined. (Such cases never occur when $\Pi_G(s)$ is used in this document.)
3. Return $u$.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Customer/Country,Product/Name),
                                  aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Customer(Country),Product(Name),Total)",
  "value": [
    { "Customer": { "Country": "Netherlands" },
      "Product": { "Name": "Paper" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  3 },
    { "Customer": { "Country": "Netherlands" },
      "Product": { "Name": "Sugar" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  2 },
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Product": { "Name": "Coffee" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 12 },
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Product": { "Name": "Paper" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  5 },
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Product": { "Name": "Sugar" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  2 }
  ]
}
```
:::

If the second parameter is omitted, steps 2 and 3 above produce one instance containing only the grouping properties per distinct value combination.

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((Product/Name,Amount))
```
results in
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Product(Name),Amount)",
  "value": [
    { "Product": { "Name": "Coffee" }, "Amount": 4 },
    { "Product": { "Name": "Coffee" }, "Amount": 8 },
    { "Product": { "Name": "Paper"  }, "Amount": 1 },
    { "Product": { "Name": "Paper"  }, "Amount": 2 },
    { "Product": { "Name": "Paper"  }, "Amount": 4 },
    { "Product": { "Name": "Sugar"  }, "Amount": 2 }
  ]
}
```
Note that the result has the same structure, but not the same content as
```
GET /service/Sales?$expand=Product($select=Name)&$select=Amount
```
:::

A `groupby` transformation affects the structure of the output set similar to `$select` where each grouping property corresponds to an item in a `$select` clause.

#### ##subsubsubsec Grouping with `rollup`

The `rollup` grouping operator allows applying set transformations to instances of an input set organized in a [leveled hierarchy](#LeveledHierarchy). It can be used instead of a grouping property in the first parameter of `groupby`. It has two overloads, depending on the number of parameters.

If used with two or more parameters, it defines an unnamed leveled hierarchy of grouping properties as a list of [data aggregation paths](#DataAggregationPath) with single-valued segments. The first path in the list is the root level of the hierarchy defining the coarsest granularity, and the other paths define consecutively finer-grained levels of the hierarchy. This unnamed hierarchy is used for grouping instances.

A groupby with `rollup` applied to a leveled hierarchy allows requesting aggregation for all levels of that hierarchy. It splits the input set into groups using all grouping properties (see (1) below), then removes the last property from the hierarchy (see (2)) and repeats this process using the remaining grouping properties until all of the levels have been used up (see terminating rule (3)).

Such a grouping with `rollup` for a leveled hierarchy is processed using the following equivalence relationships, in which $p_1,…,p_k$ are groupable property paths representing a level, $T$ is a transformation sequence, the ellipsis ($…$) stands in for zero or more property paths, $P_1$ stands in for zero or more property paths and $P_2$ for zero or more `rollup` or [`rolluprecursive`](#Groupingwithrolluprecursive) operators or property paths:

- ${\tt groupby}((P_1,{\tt rollup}(p_1,…,p_{k-1},p_k),P_2),T)$ is equivalent to
  $$\matrix{ 
  {\tt concat}(\hfill\\ 
  \quad {\tt groupby}((P_1,p_1,…,p_{k-1},p_k,P_2),T),\hfill&\tt (1)\\ 
  \quad {\tt groupby}((P_1,{\tt rollup}(p_1,…,p_{k-1}),P_2),T)\hfill&\tt(2)\\ 
  ).\hskip25pc\\ 
  }$$
- ${\tt groupby}((P_1,{\tt rollup}(p_1,p_2),P_2),T)$ is equivalent to
  $$\matrix{ 
  {\tt concat}(\hfill&\tt (3)\\ 
  \quad {\tt groupby}((P_1,p_1,p_2,P_2),T),\hfill\\ 
  \quad {\tt groupby}((P_1,p_1,P_2),T)\hfill\\ 
  ).\hskip25pc\\ 
  }$$

::: example
Example ##ex: rolling up two hierarchies, the first with two levels, the second with three levels:
$$({\tt rollup}(p_{1,1},p_{1,2}),{\tt rollup}(p_{2,1},p_{2,2},p_{2,3}))$$
will result in the six groupings
$$\matrix{ 
(p_{1,1},p_{1,2},\hfill&p_{2,1},p_{2,2},p_{2,3})\hfill\\ 
(p_{1,1},p_{1,2},\hfill&p_{2,1},p_{2,2})\hfill\\ 
(p_{1,1},p_{1,2},\hfill&p_{2,1})\hfill\\ 
(p_{1,1},\hfill&p_{2,1},p_{2,2},p_{2,3})\hfill\\ 
(p_{1,1},\hfill&p_{2,1},p_{2,2})\hfill\\ 
(p_{1,1},\hfill&p_{2,1})\hfill 
}$$
The leveled hierarchy of the first rollup has 2 levels, the one of the second has 3 levels, and the groupings represent all possible $6=2⋅3$ combinations of levels from both hierarchies.
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: answering the second question in [section ##ExampleUseCases]
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=groupby((rollup(Customer/Country,Customer/Name),
                            rollup(Product/Category/Name,Product/Name)),
                           aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
```
results in seven entities for the finest grouping level
```json
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Customer(Country),
                                     Product(Category(Name)),Total)",
  "value": [
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA", "Name": "Joe" },
      "Product":  { "Category": { "Name": "Non-Food" }, "Name": "Paper" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 1 },
    ...
```
plus additional fifteen rollup entities for subtotals: five without customer name
```json
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Product":  { "Category": { "Name": "Food" }, "Name": "Sugar" },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  2 },
    ...
```
six without product name
```json
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA", "Name": "Joe" },
      "Product":  { "Category": { "Name": "Food" } },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":  6 },
    ...
```
and four with neither customer nor product name
```json
    { "Customer": { "Country": "USA" },
      "Product":  { "Category": { "Name": "Food" } },
      "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total": 14 },
    ...
  ]
}
```
:::

Note that the absence of one or more properties of the output structure declared by the surrounding OData context allows distinguishing rollup entities from other entities.

If `rollup` is used with one parameter, the parameter references a named leveled hierarchy to be used for grouping instances, and therefore MUST be the value of the `Qualifier` attribute of an annotation with term [`LeveledHierarchy`](#LeveledHierarchy). If the annotation has qualifier $Q$ and as value a collection consisting of $p_1,…,p_n$ with $n≥2$, then ${\tt rollup}(Q)$ is equivalent to ${\tt rollup}(p_1,…,p_n)$.

Another grouping operator [`rolluprecursive`](#Groupingwithrolluprecursive) which similarly works with a [recursive hierarchy](#RecursiveHierarchy) is defined later.
