## ##subsec One-to-One Transformations

These transformations produce an output set in one-to-one correspondence with their input set. The output set is initially a clone of the input set, then dynamic properties are added to the output set. The values of properties copied from the input set are not changed, nor is the order of instances changed.

### ##subsubsec Transformation `identity`

The output set of the `identity` transformation is its input set in unchanged order.

::: example
Example ##ex: Add a grand total row to the `Sales` result set
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=concat(identity,aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Transformation `compute`

The `compute` transformation takes a comma-separated list of one or more _compute expressions_ as parameters.

A compute expression is a common expression followed by the `as` keyword, followed by an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL).

The output set is constructed by copying the instances of the input set and adding one dynamic property per compute expression to [each occurrence](#SamenessandOrder) in the output set. The name of each added dynamic property is the alias of the corresponding compute expression. The value of each added dynamic property is computed relative to the corresponding instance. Services MAY support expressions that address dynamic properties added by other expressions within the same `compute` transformation, provided that the service can determine an evaluation sequence. The type of the property is determined by the rules for evaluating common expressions and numeric promotion defined in [#OData-URL#CommonExpressionSyntax].

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=compute(Amount mul Product/TaxRate as Tax)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Sales(*,Tax)",
  "value": [
    { "ID": 1, "Amount": 1, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.14 },
    { "ID": 2, "Amount": 2, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.12 },
    { "ID": 3, "Amount": 4, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.24 },
    { "ID": 4, "Amount": 8, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.48 },
    { "ID": 5, "Amount": 4, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.56 },
    { "ID": 6, "Amount": 2, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.12 },
    { "ID": 7, "Amount": 1, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.14 },
    { "ID": 8, "Amount": 2, "Tax@type": "Decimal", "Tax": 0.28 }
  ]
}
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Transformation `addnested`

The `addnested` transformation expands a path relative to the input set, applies one or more transformation sequences to the addressed resources, and adds the transformed resources as dynamic (navigation) properties to the output set. The output set $A$ is initially a clone of the input set.

The first parameter of the `addnested` transformation is a path $p$ or a concatenated path $p/q$. Here, $p=p_1/…/p_k$ with $k≥1$ is a [data aggregation path](#DataAggregationPath) with single- or collection-valued segments. The path $p$ MUST NOT contain any navigation properties prior to the last segment $p_k$, which MUST either be a navigation or a complex structural property. If the optional $q$ is present, it MUST be a type-cast segment. This is an extension of the definition in [#OData-URL#SystemQueryOptionexpand] in that the first parameter need not contain a navigation property.

Further parameters are one or more transformation sequences followed by the `as` keyword followed by an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL) whose name need not differ from names in the input set but MUST differ from names already in $\Gamma(A,p_1/…/p_{k-1})$ (using the [$\Gamma$ notation](#EvaluationofDataAggregationPaths)) as well as from aliases for other transformation sequences.

If $p_k$ is single-valued, the transformation sequences MUST consist of only `identity` or `compute` or `addnested` transformations, because these transform one-element collections into one-element collections. This makes it meaningful to speak (in this section only) of a transformation sequence applied to a single instance; this means applying it to a collection containing the single instance and taking as result the single instance from the output set.

[For each occurrence](#SamenessandOrder) $u$ in $\Gamma(A,p_1/…/p_{k-1})$, let $B=γ(u,p_k/q)$ and let the resource $v$ be
- the collection $B$ if $p_k$ is collection-valued
- the single instance in $B$ if $p_k$ is single-valued and $B$ is non-empty
- undefined if $p_k$ is single-valued and $B$ is empty.

If $v$ is defined, then for each transformation sequence, a dynamic property is added to $u$ as follows: If $p_k$ is a navigation property, the added property is a dynamic navigation property, which is expanded by default, otherwise it is a dynamic structural property. Its name is the alias of the transformation sequence. The value of the added property is the result of the transformation sequence applied to $v$. The dynamic property carries as control information the context URL of $v$.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Customers?$apply=addnested(Sales,
                                        filter(Amount gt 3) as FilteredSales)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Customers(FilteredSales())",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "C1", "Name": "Joe", "Country": "USA",
      "FilteredSales@context": "#Sales",
      "FilteredSales": [{ "ID": "3", "Amount": 4 }]},
    { "ID": "C2", "Name": "Sue", "Country": "USA",
      "FilteredSales@context": "#Sales",
      "FilteredSales": [{ "ID": "4", "Amount": 8 },
                        { "ID": "5", "Amount": 4 }]},
    { "ID": "C3", "Name": "Sue", "Country": "Netherlands",
      "FilteredSales@context": "#Sales",
      "FilteredSales": []},
    { "ID": "C4", "Name": "Luc", "Country": "France",
      "FilteredSales@context": "#Sales",
      "FilteredSales": []}
  ]
}
```

If `Sales` was a collection-valued complex property of type `SalesModel.SalesComplexType`, the context would be `"FilteredSales@context": "#Collection(SalesModel.SalesComplexType)"`.
:::

## ##subsec Transformations Changing the Input Set Structure

The output set of the [join](#Transformationsjoinandouterjoin) transformations differs from their input set in the number of instances as well as in their structure, but reflects the order of the input set. Transformation [`nest`](#Transformationnest) produces a one-instance output set.

### ##subsubsec Transformations `join` and `outerjoin`

The `join` and `outerjoin` transformations take as their first parameter $p$ a collection-valued complex or navigation property, optionally followed by a type-cast segment to address only instances of that derived type or one of its sub-types, followed by the `as` keyword, followed by an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL). The optional second parameter specifies a transformation sequence $T$.

[For each occurrence](#SamenessandOrder) $u$ in an [order-preserving loop](#SamenessandOrder) over the input set
1. the instance collection $A$ addressed by $p$ is identified.
2. If $T$ is provided, $A$ is replaced with the result of applying $T$ to $A$.
3. In case of an `outerjoin`, if $A$ is empty, a null instance is added to it.
4. [For each occurrence](#SamenessandOrder) $v$ in an [order-preserving loop](#SamenessandOrder) over $A$ an instance $w$ is appended to the output set of the transformation:
   - The instance $w$ is a clone of $u$ with an additional dynamic property whose name is the given alias and whose value is $v$.
   - The dynamic property is a navigation property if $p$ is a collection-valued navigation property, otherwise it is a complex property.
   - The dynamic property carries as control information the context URL of $v$.

::: example
Example ##ex: all links between products and sales instances
```
GET /service/Products?$apply=join(Sales as Sale)&$select=ID&$expand=Sale
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Products(ID,Sale())",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "P1",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 2, "Amount": 2 } },
    { "ID": "P1",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 6, "Amount": 2 } },
    { "ID": "P2",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 3, "Amount": 4 } },
    { "ID": "P2",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 4, "Amount": 8 } },
    { "ID": "P3",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 1, "Amount": 1 } },
    { "ID": "P3",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 5, "Amount": 4 } },
    { "ID": "P3",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 7, "Amount": 1 } },
    { "ID": "P3",
      "Sale": {
        "@context": "#Sales/$entity",
        "ID": 8, "Amount": 2 } }
  ]
}
```

In this example, `$expand=Sale` is used to include the target entities in the result. There are no subsequent transformations like `groupby` that would cause it to be expanded by default. If the first parameter `Sales` was a collection-valued complex property of type `SalesModel.SalesComplexType`, the complex property `Sale` would be in the result regardless, and its context would be `"@context": "#SalesModel.SalesComplexType"`.

Applying `outerjoin` instead would return an additional instance for product with `"ID": "P4"` and `Sale` having a null value.
:::

### ##subsubsec Transformation `nest`

The `nest` transformation takes as parameters one or more transformation sequences followed by the `as` keyword followed by an [alias](#TypeStructureandContextURL).

The output set consists of a single instance of the [input type](#TypeStructureandContextURL) without entity-id having one dynamic property per transformation sequence. The name of the dynamic property is the alias for this transformation sequence. The value of the dynamic property is the collection resulting from the transformation sequence applied to the input set. The dynamic property carries as control information the context URL of the transformed input set.

::: example
Example ##ex:
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=nest(groupby((Customer/ID)) as Customers)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Sales(Customers())",
  "value": [
    { "Customers@context": "#Sales(Customer(ID))",
      "Customers": [ { "Customer": { "ID": "C1" } },
                     { "Customer": { "ID": "C2" } },
                     { "Customer": { "ID": "C3" } } ] }
  ]
}
```
:::
