## ##subsec Expressions Evaluable on a Collection

The following two subsections introduce two new types of [expression](#Expression) that are evaluated relative to a collection, called the input collection.

These expressions are either prepended with a collection-valued path followed by a forward slash, like a lambda operator [OData-URL, section 5.1.1.13](#ODataURL). The collection identified by that path is then the input collection for the expression.

Or these expressions are not prepended by a path, the input collection is then the _current collection_ defined below. The expression can then have as parameter another expression in which paths are evaluated relative to the current collection, unless they are prefixed with a lambda variable, `$it`, `$this` or `$root`. If the expression appears in a position where no current collection is defined, the service MUST reject the request. (A future version of the core specification may allow this also for `any` and `all`.)

In a system query option other than `$apply`, possibly nested within `$expand` or `$select`, the current collection is the collection that is the subject of the system query option.

In a path segment that addresses a subset of a collection [OData-URL, section 4.12](#ODataURL), the current collection is the collection that is the subject of the path segment.

In an `$apply` transformation, the current collection is the input set of the transformation.

### ##subsubsec Function `aggregate`

The `aggregate` function allows to use aggregated values in [expressions](#Expression). It takes a single parameter accepting an aggregate-function expression and returns the aggregated value of type `Edm.PrimitiveType` as the result from applying the aggregate-function expression on its input collection.

An aggregate-function expression offers the same capabilities as an aggregate expression defined for the `aggregate` transformation except that it never includes an alias for introducing a dynamic property containing the aggregated value. More precisely, the function `aggregate` can be defined in terms of the transformation [`aggregate`](#AggregationAlgorithm) applied to an input set $I$:

Let $A$ be an aggregate expression of type 1, 3 or 4, and let $\hat A$ be one of the following:
- Let $\hat A=z/A$ where $z$ is a `lambdaVariableExpr`, then let $I$ be the collection consisting of the instance addressed by $z$ (see [example ##aggrzA]).
- Let $\hat A={\tt\$it}/A$, then let $I$ be the collection consisting of the instance addressed by `$it` (see [example ##aggritA]).
- Let $\hat A=A$, then let $I$ be the current collection (see [example ##aggrA]).

Then the function ${\tt aggregate}(\hat A)$ MUST NOT be prepended with a collection-valued path. It evaluates to the value of the property $D$ in the single instance of the output set that is produced when the transformation ${\tt aggregate}(A{\tt\ as\ }D)$ is applied with $I$ as input set.

::: example
Example ##ex_aggrA: Sales making up at least a third of the total sales amount. The `$filter` expression in this example contains a sub-expression `Amount` that is evaluated relative to the "current instance" and a sub-expression `aggregate(Amount with sum)` that is evaluated relative to the "current collection".
```
GET /service/Sales?$filter=Amount mul 3 ge aggregate(Amount with sum)
```
results in
```
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "4", "Amount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

Let $A$ be an aggregate expression of type 2. Then the function `aggregate`
- may be without collection-valued path, in this case let $I$ be the current collection
- or may be prepended with a collection-valued path $p$ and its argument $A$ MUST be preceded by a case-sensitive lambda variable name followed by a colon (`:`), in this case let $I$ be the collection addressed by $p$.

Then the function ${\tt aggregate}(A)$ or ${\tt aggregate}(y{\tt:}A)$ evaluates to the value of the property $D$ in the single instance of the output set that is produced when the transformation ${\tt aggregate}(A{\tt\ as\ }D)$ is applied with $I$ as input set and, during evaluation of the aggregatable expression $A$, the single-valued data aggregation paths are evaluated
- relative to $y$ if they are preceded by the lambda variable $y/{}$
- relative to the origin of path $p$ if they are not preceded by a lambda variable or `$it`.

::: example
Example ##ex: Products with more than 1.00 sales tax. The aggregate expression of type 2 combines paths with and without lambda variable (compare this with [example ##aggrmul]).
```
GET /service/Products?$filter=Sales/aggregate(s:s/Amount mul TaxRate with sum)
                              gt 1
```
:::

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex: products with a single sale of at least twice the average sales amount
```
GET /service/Products?$filter=Sales/any(s:s/Amount ge
                        aggregate($it/Sales/Amount with average) mul 2)
```
Both examples result in
```
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Products",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "P3", "Name": "Paper", "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.14 }
  ]
}
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Expression `$count`

The expression `$count` evaluates to the cardinality of the input collection.

::: example
Example ##ex_collexpr: The input collection for `$count` consists of all sales entities, the top third of sales entities by amount form the result.
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=topcount($count div 3,Amount)
```
results in 2 (a third of 8, rounded down) entities. (This differs from `toppercent(33.3,Amount)`, which returns only the sales entity with `ID` 4, because that already makes up a third of the total amount.)
```
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales",
  "value": [
    { "ID": 3, "Amount": 4 },
    { "ID": 4, "Amount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

A definition that is equivalent to a `$count` expression after a collection-valued path was made in [OData-URL, section 4.8](#ODataURL).

## ##subsec Function `isdefined`

Properties that are not explicitly mentioned in [`aggregate`](#Transformationaggregate) or [`groupby`](#Transformationgroupby) are considered to have been _aggregated away_. Since they are treated as having the null value in `$filter` expressions, the `$filter` expression `Product eq null` cannot distinguish between an instance containing the value for the null product and the instance containing the aggregated value across all products (where the `Product` has been aggregated away).

The function `isdefined` can be used to determine whether a property is present or absent in an instance. It takes a [single-valued property path](#SingleValuedPropertyPath) as its only parameter and returns true if the property is present in the instance for which the expression containing the `isdefined` function call is evaluated. A present property can still have the null value; it can represent a grouping of null values, or an aggregation that results in a null value.

::: example
Example ##ex: `Product` has been aggregated away, causing an empty result
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total)
           &$filter=isdefined(Product)
```
results in
```
{
  "@odata.context": "$metadata#Sales(Total)",
  "value": []
}
```
:::

## ##subsec Evaluating `$apply` as an Expand and Select Option

The new system query option `$apply` can be used as an expand or select option to inline the result of aggregating related entities or nested instances. The rules for [evaluating `$apply`](#SystemQueryOptionapply) are applied in the context of the expanded navigation or the selected collection of instances, i.e. `$apply` is evaluated first, and other expand or select options on the same (navigation) property are evaluated on the result of `$apply`.

::: example
Example ##ex: products with aggregated sales
```
GET /service/Products
  ?$expand=Sales($apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
```
results in
```
{
  "@odata.context":"$metadata#Products(Sales(Total))",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "P2", "Name": "Coffee", "Color": "Brown", "TaxRate": 0.06,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":   12 } ] },
    { "ID": "P3", "Name": "Paper",  "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.14,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":    8 } ] },
    { "ID": "P4", "Name": "Pencil", "Color": "Black", "TaxRate": 0.14,
      "Sales": [ { "Total": null } ] },
    { "ID": "P1", "Name": "Sugar",  "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.06,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@odata.type": "Decimal", "Total":    4 } ] }
  ]
}
```
:::

## ##subsec ABNF for Extended URL Conventions

The normative ABNF construction rules for this specification are defined in [OData-Agg-ABNF](#ODataAggABNF). They incrementally extend the rules defined in [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF).
