## ##subsec Expressions Evaluable on a Collection

The following two subsections introduce two new types of [expression](#Expression) that are evaluated relative to a collection, called the input collection.

These expressions are
- either prepended with a collection-valued path $p$ followed by a forward slash, like a lambda operator [OData-URL, section "Lambda Operators"]($$$OData-URL$$$#LambdaOperators). The collection identified by that path is then the input collection for the expression.
- or prepended with the keyword `$these` followed by a forward slash, the input collection is then the _current collection_ defined as follows:
  - In a system query option other than `$apply`, possibly nested within `$expand` or `$select`, the current collection is the collection that is the subject of the system query option.
  - In a path segment that addresses a subset of a collection [OData-URL, section "Addressing a Subset of a Collection"]($$$OData-URL$$$#AddressingaSubsetofaCollection), the current collection is the collection that is the subject of the path segment.
  - In an `$apply` transformation, the current collection is the input set of the transformation.

### ##subsubsec Function `aggregate`

The `aggregate` function allows the use of aggregated values in [expressions](#Expression). It takes a single parameter accepting an [aggregate expression](#AggregateExpression) and returns the aggregated value of type `Edm.PrimitiveType` as the result from applying the aggregate expression on its input collection.

More precisely, if $α$ is an aggregate expression, the function $p/{\tt aggregate}(α)$ or ${\tt\$these}/{\tt aggregate}(α)$ evaluates to the value of the property $D$ in the single instance of the output set that is produced when the transformation ${\tt aggregate}(α{\tt\ as\ }D)$ is applied with the input collection as input set.

::: example
Example ##ex: Sales making up at least a third of the total sales amount.
```
GET /service/Sales?$filter=Amount mul 3 ge $these/aggregate(Amount with sum)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Sales",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "4", "Amount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

::: example
Example ##ex: Products with more than 1.00 sales tax. The aggregate expression of type 2 combines paths with and without `$it` prefix (compare this with [example ##aggrmul]).
```
GET /service/Products?$filter=Sales/aggregate(Amount mul $it/TaxRate with sum)
                              gt 1
```
:::

::: example
⚠ Example ##ex: products with a single sale of at least twice the average sales amount
```
GET /service/Products?$filter=Sales/any(s:s/Amount ge
                              Sales/aggregate(Amount with average) mul 2)
```
Both examples result in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Products",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "P3", "Name": "Paper", "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.14 }
  ]
}
```
:::

### ##subsubsec Expression `$count`

The expression `$count` evaluates to the cardinality of the input collection.

::: example
Example ##ex_collexpr: The input collection for `$count` consists of all sales entities, the top third of sales entities by amount form the result.
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=topcount($these/$count div 3,Amount)
```
results in 2 (a third of 8, rounded down) entities. (This differs from `toppercent(33.3,Amount)`, which returns only the sales entity with `ID` 4, because that already makes up a third of the total amount.)
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Sales",
  "value": [
    { "ID": 3, "Amount": 4 },
    { "ID": 4, "Amount": 8 }
  ]
}
```
:::

A definition that is equivalent to a `$count` expression after a collection-valued path was made in [OData-URL, section "Addressing the Count of a Collection"]($$$OData-URL$$$#AddressingtheCountofaCollection).

## ##subsec Function `isdefined`

Properties that are not explicitly mentioned in [`aggregate`](#Transformationaggregate) or [`groupby`](#Transformationgroupby) are considered to have been _aggregated away_. Since they are treated as having the null value in `$filter` expressions [OData-URL, section "Path Expressions"]($$$OData-URL$$$#PathExpressions), the `$filter` expression `Product eq null` cannot distinguish between an instance containing the value for the null product and the instance containing the aggregated value across all products (where the `Product` has been aggregated away).

The function `isdefined` can be used to determine whether a property is present or absent in an instance. It takes a [single-valued property path](#SingleValuedPropertyPath) as its only parameter and returns true if the property is present in the instance for which the expression containing the `isdefined` function call is evaluated. A present property can still have the null value; it can represent a grouping of null values, or an aggregation that results in a null value.

::: example
Example ##ex: `Product` has been aggregated away, causing an empty result
```
GET /service/Sales?$apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total)
           &$filter=isdefined(Product)
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Sales(Total)",
  "value": []
}
```
:::

## ##subsec Evaluating `$apply` as an Expand and Select Option

The new system query option `$apply` can be used as an expand or select option to inline the result of aggregating related entities or nested instances. The rules for [evaluating `$apply`](#SystemQueryOptionapply) are applied in the context of the related collection of entities or the selected collection of instances, meaning this context defines the input set of the first transformation. Furthermore, `$apply` is evaluated first, and other expand or select options on the same (navigation) property are evaluated on the result of `$apply`.

::: example
Example ##ex: products with aggregated sales
```
GET /service/Products
  ?$expand=Sales($apply=aggregate(Amount with sum as Total))
```
results in
```json
{
  "@context": "$metadata#Products(Sales(Total))",
  "value": [
    { "ID": "P2", "Name": "Coffee", "Color": "Brown", "TaxRate": 0.06,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@type": "Decimal", "Total":   12 } ] },
    { "ID": "P3", "Name": "Paper",  "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.14,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@type": "Decimal", "Total":    8 } ] },
    { "ID": "P4", "Name": "Pencil", "Color": "Black", "TaxRate": 0.14,
      "Sales": [ { "Total": null } ] },
    { "ID": "P1", "Name": "Sugar",  "Color": "White", "TaxRate": 0.06,
      "Sales": [ { "Total@type": "Decimal", "Total":    4 } ] }
  ]
}
```
:::

## ##subsec ABNF for Extended URL Conventions

The normative ABNF construction rules for this specification are defined in [OData-Agg-ABNF](#ODataAggABNF). They incrementally extend the rules defined in [OData-ABNF](#ODataABNF).
